



Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                          S. Sheng
Request for Comments: 10026                                             
BCP: 246                                                    P. Thomassen
Category: Best Current Practice                                    deSEC
ISSN: 2070-1721                                                July 2026


Operational Recommendations for DNSSEC Delegation Signer (DS) Automation

Abstract

   Enabling support for automatic acceptance of DNSSEC Delegation Signer
   (DS) parameters from the Child DNS operator (via RFCs 7344, 8078, and
   9615) requires the Parental Agent, often a registry or registrar, to
   make a number of technical decisions around acceptance checks, error
   and success reporting, and multi-party issues such as concurrent
   updates.  This document describes recommendations about how these
   points are best addressed in practice.

Status of This Memo

   This memo documents an Internet Best Current Practice.

   This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
   received public review and has been approved for publication by the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Further information on
   BCPs is available in Section 2 of RFC 7841.

   Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
   and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
   https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc10026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
   in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
     2.1.  Requirements Notation
   3.  Recommendations for Deployments of DS Automation
   4.  Acceptance Checks and Safety Measures
     4.1.  Recommendations
     4.2.  Analysis
       4.2.1.  Continuity of Resolution
       4.2.2.  Timing, TTLs, and Caching
       4.2.3.  CDS vs. CDNSKEY
   5.  Reporting and Transparency
     5.1.  Recommendations
     5.2.  Analysis
   6.  Registration Locks
     6.1.  Recommendations
     6.2.  Analysis
       6.2.1.  Registrar vs. Registry Lock
       6.2.2.  Detailed Rationale
   7.  Multiple Submitting Parties and Suspension of Automation
     7.1.  Recommendations
     7.2.  Analysis
       7.2.1.  Necessity of Non-Automatic Updates
       7.2.2.  Impact of Non-Automatic Updates: When to Suspend
               Automation
       7.2.3.  Concurrent Automatic Updates
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Operational Considerations
   10. Security Considerations
   11. References
     11.1.  Normative References
     11.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Recommendations Overview
     A.1.  Acceptance Checks and Safety Measures
     A.2.  Reporting and Transparency
     A.3.  Registration Locks
     A.4.  Multiple Submitting Parties and Suspension of Automation
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   [RFC7344], [RFC8078], and [RFC9615] automate DNSSEC [RFC9364]
   delegation trust maintenance by having the child publish Child DS
   (CDS) and/or Child DNSKEY (CDNSKEY) records, which indicate the
   delegation's desired DNSSEC parameters ("DS automation").

   Parental Agents using these protocols have to make a number of
   technical decisions relating to issues of acceptance checks, timing,
   error reporting, locks, etc.  Additionally, when using the
   registrant-registrar-registry (RRR) model (as is common amongst top-
   level domains (TLDs)), both the registrar and the registry can effect
   parent-side changes to the delegation.  In such a situation,
   additional opportunities for implementation differences arise.

   Not all existing DS automation deployments have made the same choices
   with respect to these questions, leading to somewhat inconsistent
   behavior.  From the perspective of a domain holder with domain names
   under various TLDs, this may be unexpected and confusing.

   In the following sections, operational questions are first raised and
   answered with the corresponding recommendations.  Each section is
   concluded with an analysis of its recommendations and related
   considerations.  A combined view of the recommendations from all
   sections is given in Appendix A.

   Readers are expected to be familiar with DNSSEC [RFC9364] [RFC9615]
   [RFC9859] [RFC9975].

   The core issues addressed in the document are derived from
   Section 4.4 of [SAC126].  Readers are referred to this report for
   additional background.

2.  Terminology

   The term "Parental Agent" is used as defined in Section 1.1 of
   [RFC7344].  The document also uses terms defined in [RFC9499], in
   particular:

   *  DNS operator

   *  Registry

   *  Registrant

   *  Registrar

   In addition, the document makes use of the following terms:

   Child zone:  DNS zone whose delegation is in the Parent zone.

   Child (DNS operator):  DNS operator responsible for a Child zone.

   Parent zone:  DNS zone that holds a delegation for a Child zone.

   Parent:  The operator responsible for a Parent zone and thus involved
      with the maintenance of the delegation's DNSSEC parameters (in
      particular, the acceptance of these parameters and the publication
      of corresponding DS records).

   RRR Model:  The registrant-registrar-registry (RRR) interaction
      framework, where registrants interact with a registrar to register
      and manage domain names and registrars interact with the domain's
      registry for the provision and management of domain names on the
      registrant's behalf.  This model is common amongst TLDs.

2.1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Recommendations for Deployments of DS Automation

   The guidelines for deploying DS automation set out in this document
   are meant to achieve more uniform treatment across suffixes --
   minimizing user surprise and providing baseline safety and uniformity
   of behavior.  They are also intended to prevent disruption of DNS and
   DNSSEC functionality.  At a minimum, compliance with this RFC
   requires support for both DNSSEC bootstrapping [RFC9615] and
   subsequent updates [RFC7344] [RFC8078] under the implementation
   guidance below.

   The recommendations optimize interoperability and safety.  In certain
   cases, local policy may take precedence, such as when a registry is
   subjected to national cryptographic policy requirements.  However,
   not following any requirements designated with the "SHOULD" key word
   will generally lead to undesirable effects of ambiguity and
   interoperability issues.  When implementing these recommendations,
   operators MUST mitigate issues arising from any particular deviation.

   Registries with additional requirements on DS update checks MAY
   implement any additional checks in line with local policy.

4.  Acceptance Checks and Safety Measures

   This section provides recommendations to address the following
   operational questions:

   *  What kind of acceptance checks should be performed on DS
      parameters?

   *  Should these checks be performed upon acceptance or also
      continually when in place?

   *  How do TTLs and caching impact DS provisioning?  How important is
      timing in a child key change?

   *  Are parameters for DS automation best conveyed as CDNSKEY or CDS
      records or both?

4.1.  Recommendations

   1.  Entities performing automated DS maintenance MUST verify:

       a.  the unambiguous intent of each DS bootstrapping or update
           request as per [RFC9975], by checking its consistency both

           *  between any published CDS and CDNSKEY records and

           *  across all authoritative nameservers in the delegation,

           and

       b.  that the resulting DS record set would allow continued DNSSEC
           validation if deployed

       and cancel the update if the verifications do not succeed.

   2.  Parent-side entities (such as registries) SHOULD allow for
       effective rollback by reducing a DS record set's TTL to a value
       between 5-15 minutes when a new set of records is published, and
       restore the previous (or, if unavailable, default) TTL value at a
       later occasion (but not before the previous DS RRset's TTL has
       expired).

       Besides a prudent choice of TTL, prompt DS changes also require
       timely discovery of update requests.  For recommended methods,
       see Section 4.2.2.

   3.  DNS operators MUST publish both CDNSKEY and CDS records (unless
       the parent's preference is known) and follow best practice for
       the choice of hash digest type [DS-IANA].

4.2.  Analysis

4.2.1.  Continuity of Resolution

   To maintain the basic resolution function, it is critical to avoid
   deployment of flawed DS record sets in the Parent zone.  It is
   therefore necessary for the Parent to verify that the DS record set
   resulting from an automated (or even manual) update does not break
   DNSSEC validation if deployed and otherwise cancel the update.

   This is best achieved by:

   1.  verifying that consistent CDS/CDNSKEY responses are served by all
       of the delegation's nameservers [RFC9975];

   2.  verifying that the resulting DS Resource Record set (RRset) does
       not break the delegation if applied ([RFC7344], Section 4.1),
       i.e., it provides at least one valid path for validators to use
       ([RFC6840], Section 5.11).  This is the case if the child's
       DNSKEY RRset has a valid RRSIG signature from a key that is
       referenced by at least one DS record, with the digest type and
       signing algorithm values designated as "RECOMMENDED" or "MUST" in
       the "Use for DNSSEC Validation" columns of the relevant IANA
       registries ([DS-IANA] and [DNSKEY-IANA]).  Note that these checks
       need not be enforced when provisioning DS records manually in
       order to enable the use of other digest types or algorithms for
       potentially non-interoperable purposes.

   Even without an update being requested, Parents may occasionally
   check whether the current DS contents would still be acceptable if
   they were newly submitted in CDS/CDNSKEY form (see Section 4).  Any
   failures -- such as a missing DNSKEY due to improper rollover timing
   ([RFC6781], Section 4.1) or changed algorithm requirements -- can
   then be communicated in line with Section 5.1, without altering or
   removing the existing DS RRset.

4.2.2.  Timing, TTLs, and Caching

   For timely execution of DS provisioning requests, it is important to
   discover them reasonably quickly.  The best way to do so is for the
   Child DNS operator to send an [RFC9859] notification to the parent
   (Sections 4.1 and 4.2 of [RFC9859]).  In addition to publication of
   the relevant notification targets, this requires the advertised
   endpoint to actually listen (Sections 3 and 4.3 of [RFC9859]).  By
   explicitly naming a responsible endpoint, this method also resolves
   potential contention between registry and registrar when the RRR
   model is used (see Section 7.2.3).  Note that periodic scanning is a
   suboptimal alternative as it introduces policy-dependent delays and
   does not scale well for large zones.

   To further reduce the impact of any misconfigured DS record set -- be
   it from automated or from manual provisioning -- the option to
   quickly roll back the delegation's DNSSEC parameters is of great
   importance.  This is achieved by setting a comparatively low TTL on
   the DS record set in the parent domain, at the cost of reduced
   resiliency against nameserver unreachability due to the earlier
   expiration of cached records.  The availability risk can be mitigated
   by limiting such TTLs to a brief time period after a change to the DS
   configuration, during which rollbacks are most likely to occur.

   Registries therefore should significantly lower the DS RRset's TTL
   for some time following bootstrapping or an update.  Pragmatic values
   for the reduced TTL value range between 5-15 minutes.  Using values
   below 5 minutes risks excessive queries, and using values greater
   than 15 minutes may impact recovery from operational mistakes.

   Note that recent measurements have demonstrated low TTLs like the
   above to have negligible impact on the overall load of a registry's
   authoritative nameserver infrastructure [LowTTL].

   The reduction should be in effect at least for a couple of days and
   until the previous DS record set has expired from caches, i.e., the
   period during which the low-TTL is applied typically will
   significantly exceed the normal TTL value.  When using the Extensible
   Provisioning Protocol (EPP) [RFC5730], the domain <info> command
   described in Section 2.1.1.2 of [RFC9803] can be used by the
   registrar to obtain the registry's TTL policy.

   While this approach enables quick rollbacks, timing of the desired DS
   update process itself is largely governed by the previous DS RRset's
   TTL and therefore does not generally benefit from an overall speed-
   up.  Note also that nothing is gained from first lowering the TTL of
   the old DS RRset: Such an additional step would, in fact, require
   another wait period while resolver caches adjust.  For the sake of
   completeness, there likewise is no point to increasing any DS TTL
   values beyond their normal value.

4.2.3.  CDS vs. CDNSKEY

   DS records can be generated from information provided either in DS
   format (CDS) or in DNSKEY format (CDNSKEY).  While the format of CDS
   records is identical to that of DS records (so the record data can be
   taken verbatim), generation of a DS record from CDNSKEY information
   involves computing a hash.

   Whether a Parent processes CDS or CDNSKEY records depends on their
   preference:

   *  Processing (and storing) CDNSKEY information allows the Parent to
      control the choice of hash algorithms.  The Parent may then
      unilaterally regenerate DS records with a different choice of hash
      algorithm(s) whenever deemed appropriate.

   *  Processing CDS information allows the Child DNS operator to
      control the hash digest type used in DS records, enabling the
      Child DNS operator to deploy (for example) experimental hash
      digests and removing the need for registry-side changes when
      additional digest types become available.

   The need to make a choice in the face of this dichotomy is not
   specific to DS automation: Even when DNSSEC parameters are relayed to
   the Parent through conventional channels, the Parent has to make some
   choice about which format(s) to accept.

   As there exists no protocol for Child DNS operators to discover a
   Parent's input format preference, interoperability requires
   publication of both CDNSKEY as well as CDS records, in line with
   Section 5 of [RFC7344].  The choice of hash digest type should follow
   current best practice [DS-IANA].

   Publishing the same information in two different formats is not
   ideal.  Still, it is much less complex and costly than burdening the
   Child DNS operator with discovering each Parent's current policy.
   Also, it is very easily automated.  Operators should ensure that
   published RRsets are consistent with each other.

   If both RRsets are published, Parents are expected to verify
   consistency between them by verifying that they refer to the same set
   of keys [RFC9975].  By not second-guessing inconsistencies (such as
   by RRset recency) and instead rejecting them, responsibility to
   clearly express each update request is placed on the Child DNS
   operator.

   CDS records need only be considered for CDNSKEY consistency when
   their digest type field is designated as "MUST" in the "Implement for
   DNSSEC Delegation" column of the "Digest Algorithms" registry
   [DS-IANA].  Consistency of records with other digest types need not
   be verified, especially when the digest type is unsupported; such
   records can be ignored.  Note that this does not imply a restriction
   on the DS hash digest types: If no inconsistencies are found, the
   parent can publish DS records with whatever digest type(s) it
   prefers.

5.  Reporting and Transparency

   This section provides recommendations to address the following
   operational question:

   *  Should a failed (or even successful) DS update trigger a
      notification to anyone?

5.1.  Recommendations

   1.  For certain DS updates (see analysis (Section 5.2)) and for DS
       deactivation, relevant points of contact known to the parent-side
       entity (registry or registrar) SHOULD be notified.

   2.  For error conditions, the child DNS operator and the domain's
       technical contact (if applicable) SHOULD be notified first.  The
       registrant SHOULD NOT be notified unless the problem persists for
       a prolonged amount of time (e.g., three days).

   3.  Child DNS operators SHOULD be notified of errors using a report
       query [RFC9567] to the agent domain as described in Section 4 of
       [RFC9859].  Note that this requires listening to notifications
       and that appropriate notification targets are in place (Section 3
       of [RFC9859]).

       Notifications to humans (domain holder) will be performed in
       accordance with the communication preferences established with
       the parent-side entity.  The same condition SHOULD NOT be
       reported unnecessarily frequently to the same recipient.

   4.  In the RRR model, registries performing DS automation SHOULD
       inform the registrar of any DS record changes via the EPP Change
       Poll Extension [RFC8590] or a similar channel.

   5.  The currently active DS configuration SHOULD be made accessible
       to the registrant (or their designated party) through the
       customer portal available for domain management.  The DS update
       history MAY be made available in the same way.

5.2.  Analysis

   When accepting or rejecting a DS update, it cannot be assumed that
   relevant parties are aware of what's happening.  For example, a
   registrar may not know when an automatic DS update is performed by
   the registry.  Similarly, a Child DNS operator may not be aware when
   their CDS/CDNSKEY RRsets are out of sync across nameservers, causing
   them to be ignored.

   To help involved parties act appropriately and in a timely manner,
   entities performing automated DS maintenance should report on
   conditions they encounter.  The following success situations may be
   of particular interest:

   1.  A DS RRset has been provisioned:

       a.  manually;

       b.  due to commencing DS automation (either via DNSSEC
           bootstrapping or for the first time after a manual change;
           see Section 7);

       c.  automatically, as an update to an existing DS RRset that had
           itself been automatically provisioned.

   2.  The DS RRset has been removed:

       a.  manually;

       b.  automatically, using a delete signal ([RFC8078], Section 4).

   In addition, there are error conditions worthy of being reported:

   3.  A pending DS update cannot be applied due to an error condition.
       There are various scenarios where an automated DS update might
       have been requested but can't be fulfilled.  These include:

       a.  The new DS record set would break validation/resolution or is
           not acceptable to the Parent for some other reason (see
           Section 4).

       b.  A lock prevents DS automation (see Section 6).

   4.  No DS update is due, but it was determined that the Child zone is
       no longer compatible with the existing DS record set (e.g., DS
       RRset only references non-existing keys).

   In these latter two cases, the entity performing DS automation would
   be justified to attempt communicating the situation.  Potential
   recipients are:

   *  Child DNS operator, preferably by making a report query [RFC9567]
      to the agent domain listed in the EDNS0 Report-Channel option of
      the DS update notification that triggered the DS update
      ([RFC9859], Section 4) or else via email to the address contained
      in the Child zone's SOA RNAME field (see Sections 3.3.13 and 8 of
      [RFC1035]);

   *  Registrar (if DS automation is performed by the registry);

   *  Registrant (domain holder; in non-technical language, such as
      "DNSSEC security for your domain has been enabled and will be
      maintained automatically"), or technical contact, in accordance
      with the communication preferences established with the parent-
      side entity.

   For manual updates (case 1a), commencing DS automation (case 1b), and
   deactivating DNSSEC (case 2), it seems worthwhile to notify both the
   domain's technical contact (if applicable) and the registrant.  This
   will typically lead to one notification during normal operation of a
   domain.  (Case 1c, the regular operation of automation, is not an
   interesting condition to report to a human.)

   For error conditions (cases 3 and 4), the registrant need not always
   be involved.  It seems advisable to first notify the domain's
   technical contact and the DNS operator serving the affected Child
   zone, and only if the problem persists for a prolonged amount of time
   (e.g., three days), notify the registrant.

   When the RRR model is used and the registry performs DS automation,
   the registrar should always stay informed of any DS record changes,
   e.g., via the EPP Change Poll Extension [RFC8590].

   Overly frequent reporting of the same condition to the same recipient
   is discouraged (e.g., no more than twice in a row).  For example,
   when CDS and CDNSKEY records are inconsistent and prevent DS
   initialization, the registrant may be notified twice.  Additional
   notifications may be sent with some back-off mechanism (in increasing
   intervals).

   The registrant (or their designated party) should be able to retrieve
   the current DS configuration through the customer portal available
   for domain management.  Failure to provide the registrant a means to
   inspect the current configuration after it has been changed may
   hinder recovery from operational incidents because the registrant may
   have out-of-date information.

   Ideally, the history of DS updates would also be available.  However,
   due to the associated state requirements and the lack of direct
   operational impact, implementation of this is optional.  If supported
   by the registry, the DS TTL currently in effect can be obtained using
   the RDAP TTL extension [RDAP-TTL].

   For troubleshooting, dispute resolution, and post-incident analysis,
   it is instrumental for the Parental Agent to retain structured
   records of each DS automation decision, including timestamp,
   triggering CDS/CDNSKEY RRsets, notification channel, authoritative
   nameservers consulted, verification results, decision outcome, and
   the applied DS RRset or cancellation reason.

6.  Registration Locks

   This section provides recommendations to address the following
   operational question:

   *  How does DS automation interact with other registration state
      parameters, such as registration locks?

6.1.  Recommendations

   1.  To secure ongoing operations, automated DS maintenance MUST NOT
       be suspended based on a registrar update lock alone (such as EPP
       status clientUpdateProhibited [RFC5731]).

   2.  When performed by the registry, automated DS maintenance MUST NOT
       be suspended based on a registry update lock alone (such as EPP
       status serverUpdateProhibited [RFC5731]).

6.2.  Analysis

   Registries and registrars can set various types of locks for domain
   registrations, usually upon the registrant's request.  An overview of
   standardized locks using EPP, for example, is given in Section 2.3 of
   [RFC5731].  Some registries may offer additional (or other) types of
   locks whose meaning and set/unset mechanisms are defined according to
   a proprietary policy.

   While some locks clearly should have no impact on DS automation (such
   as transfer or deletion locks), other types of locks, in particular
   "update locks", deserve a closer analysis.

6.2.1.  Registrar vs. Registry Lock

   A registrar-side update lock (such as clientUpdateProhibited in EPP)
   protects against various types of accidental or malicious change
   (like unintended changes through the registrar's customer portal).
   Its security model does not prevent the registrar's (nor the
   registry's) actions.  This is because a registrar-side lock can be
   removed by the registrar without an out-of-band interaction.

   Under such a security model, no tangible security benefit is gained
   by preventing automated DS maintenance based on a registrar lock
   alone, while preventing it would make maintenance needlessly
   difficult.  It is therefore not justified to suspend automation when
   such a lock is present.

   When a registry-side update lock is in place, the registrar cannot
   apply any changes (for security or delinquency or other reasons).
   However, it does not protect against changes made by the registry
   itself.  This is exemplified by the serverUpdateProhibited EPP
   status, which demands only that the registrar's "[r]equests to update
   the object [...] MUST be rejected" (Section 2.3 of [RFC5731]).  This
   type of lock therefore precludes DS automation by the registrar,
   while registry-side automation remains unaffected.

   DS automation by the registry is consistent with Section 2.3 of
   [RFC5731], which explicitly notes that an EPP server (registry) may
   override status values set by an EPP client (registrar), subject to
   local server policies.  The risk that DS changes from registry-side
   DS automation might go unnoticed by the registrar is mitigated by
   sending change notifications to the registrar; see Recommendation 4
   of Section 5.

6.2.2.  Detailed Rationale

   Pre-DNSSEC, it was possible for a registration to be set up once,
   then locked and left alone (no maintenance required).  With DNSSEC
   comes a change to this operational model: The configuration may have
   to be maintained in order to remain secure and operational.  For
   example, the Child DNS operator may switch to another signing
   algorithm if the previous one is no longer deemed appropriate or roll
   its Secure Entry Point (SEP) key for other reasons.  Such changes
   entail updating the delegation's DS records.

   If authenticated, these operations do not qualify as accidental or
   malicious changes but as legitimate and normal activity for securing
   ongoing operation.  The CDS/CDNSKEY method provides an automatic,
   authenticated means to convey DS bootstrapping and update requests
   [RFC9615] [RFC7344].  The resulting operation is subject to the
   parent's acceptance checks; in particular, it is not applied when it
   would break the delegation (see Section 4).

   Given that registrar locks protect against unintended changes (such
   as through the customer portal) while not preventing actions done by
   the registrar (or the registry) itself, such a lock is not suitable
   for defending against actions performed illegitimately by the
   registrar or registry (e.g., due to compromise).  Any attack on the
   registration data that is feasible in the presence of a registrar
   lock is also feasible regardless of whether DS maintenance is done
   automatically; in other words, DS automation is orthogonal to the
   attack vector that a registrar lock protects against.

   Considering that automated DS bootstrapping and update requests are
   required to be authenticated and validated for correctness, honoring
   such requests -- while in the registrant's interest -- comes with no
   additional associated risk when compared to other authenticated
   update methods.  Suspending automated DS maintenance therefore is not
   justified.

   Following this line of thought, at the time of document writing, some
   registries (e.g., .ch/.cz/.li) perform automated DS maintenance even
   when an "update lock" is in place.  Registries offering proprietary
   locks should carefully consider for each lock whether its scope
   warrants suspension.

   In case of a domain not yet secured with DNSSEC, automatic DS
   initialization is not required to maintain ongoing operation;
   however, authenticated DNSSEC bootstrapping [RFC9615] might be
   requested.  Besides being in the interest of security, the fact that
   a Child is requesting DS initialization through an authenticated
   method expresses the registrant's intent to have the delegation
   secured.

   Further, some domains are equipped with an update lock by default.
   Not honoring DNSSEC bootstrapping requests then imposes an additional
   burden on the registrant, who has to unlock and relock the domain in
   order to facilitate DS provisioning after registration.  This is a
   needless cost especially for large domain portfolios.  It is also
   unexpected, as the registrant already has arranged for the necessary
   CDS/CDNSKEY records to be published.  DS initialization and rollovers
   therefore should be treated the same way with respect to locks.

7.  Multiple Submitting Parties and Suspension of Automation

   This section provides recommendations to address the following
   operational questions:

   *  How are conflicts resolved when DS parameters are accepted through
      multiple channels (e.g., via a conventional channel and via
      automation)?

   *  In case both the registry and the registrar are automating DS
      provisioning, how are potential collisions resolved?

7.1.  Recommendations

   1.  Registries and registrars MUST provide another (e.g., manual)
       channel for DS maintenance in order to enable recovery when the
       Child has lost access to its signing key(s).  This out-of-band
       channel is also needed when a DNS operator does not support DS
       automation or refuses to cooperate.

   2.  DS bootstrapping and update requests MUST be executed at the next
       publication opportunity after verification of their authenticity,
       regardless of whether they are received in-band or via an out-of-
       band channel.

   3.  When processing a CDS/CDNSKEY "delete" signal to remove the
       entire DS record set ([RFC8078], Section 4), DS automation MUST
       NOT be suspended.  For all other removal requests (such as when
       received via EPP or a web form), DS automation SHOULD be
       suspended until a new DS record set has been provisioned, in
       order to prevent accidental re-initialization when the registrant
       intended to disable DNSSEC.

   4.  Whenever a non-empty DS record set is provisioned, through
       whichever channel, DS automation SHOULD NOT (or no longer) be
       suspended (including after an earlier removal).

   5.  In the RRR model, a registry MUST NOT automatically initialize DS
       records when it is known that the registrar does not provide a
       way for the domain holder to later disable DNSSEC.  If the
       registrar has declared that it performs automated DS maintenance,
       the registry SHOULD publish the registrar's notification endpoint
       [RFC9859] (if applicable) instead of their own and refrain from
       registry-side DS automation.

7.2.  Analysis

   In the RRR model, there are multiple channels through which DS
   parameters can be accepted:

   *  The registry can retrieve information about an intended DS
      provisioning request automatically from the Child DNS operator and
      apply the it directly;

   *  The registrar can retrieve the same and relay it to the registry;

   *  The registrar can obtain the information from the registrant
      through another channel (such as a non-automated "manual update"
      via web form submission) and relay it to the registry.

   There are several considerations in this context, as discussed in the
   following subsections.

7.2.1.  Necessity of Non-Automatic Updates

   Under special circumstances, it may be necessary to perform a non-
   automatic DS update.  One important example is when the key used for
   authentication of DS updates is destroyed: In this case, an automatic
   key rollover is impossible as the Child DNS operator can no longer
   authenticate the associated information.  Another example is when
   several providers are involved, but one no longer cooperates (e.g.,
   when removing a provider from a multi-provider setup).  Disabling all
   other DS management interfaces therefore poses significant
   operational risk.

   Similarly, when the registrar is known to not support DNSSEC
   (especially to not provide a means to remove a DS RRset), registries
   are cautioned against automatically initializing DS records, in order
   to prevent situations in which a misconfigured or undesired DS RRset
   cannot be repaired by the registrant.

7.2.2.  Impact of Non-Automatic Updates: When to Suspend Automation

   When an out-of-band (e.g., manual) DS update is performed while CDS/
   CDNSKEY records referencing the previous DS RRset's keys are present,
   the delegation's DS records may be reset to their previous state at
   the next run of the automation process.  This section discusses in
   which situations it is appropriate to suspend DS automation after
   such a non-automatic update.

   One option is to suspend DS automation after a manual DS update but
   only until a resumption signal is observed.  In the past, it was
   proposed that seeing an updated SOA serial in the Child zone may
   serve as a resumption signal.  However, as any arbitrary modification
   of zone contents -- including the regular updating of DNSSEC
   signature validity timestamps -- typically causes an SOA serial
   change, resumption of DS automation after a serial change comes with
   a high risk of surprise.  Additional issues arise if nameservers have
   different serial offsets (e.g., in a multi-provider setup).  This
   practice therefore is NOT RECOMMENDED.

   Note also that "automatic rollback" due to old CDS/CDNSKEY RRsets can
   only occur if they are signed with a key authorized by one of the new
   DS records.  Acceptance checks described in Section 4 further ensure
   that updates do not break validation.

   Removal of a DS record set is triggered either through a CDS/CDNSKEY
   "delete" signal observed by the party performing the automation
   ([RFC8078], Section 4) or by receiving a removal request out-of-band
   (e.g., via EPP or a web form).  In the first case, the registrant can
   expect automation to be kept active for the delegation to facilitate
   later DS bootstrapping.  In the second case, it is likely that the
   registrant intends to disable DNSSEC for the domain, and DS
   automation is best suspended (until a new DS record is provisioned
   somehow).

   One may ask how a registry can know whether a removal request
   received via EPP was the result of the registrar observing a CDS/
   CDNSKEY "delete" signal.  It turns out that the registry does not
   need to know that; in fact, the advice works out nicely regardless of
   who does the automation:

   a.  Only registry: If the registry performs automation, then the
       registry will consider any request received from the registrar as
       out-of-band (in the context of this automation).  When such
       requests demand removal of the entire DS record set, the registry
       therefore should suspend automation.

   b.  Only registrar: The registrar can always distinguish between
       removal requests obtained from a CDS/CDNSKEY "delete" signal and
       other registrant requests and suspend automation as appropriate.

   c.  In the (undesirable) case that both parties automate, there are
       two cases:

       *  If the registrant submits a manual removal request to the
          registrar, it is out-of-band from the registrar perspective
          (e.g., web form) and also for the registry (e.g., EPP).  As a
          consequence, both will suspend automation (which is the
          correct result).

       *  If a CDS/CDNSKEY "delete" signal causes the registrar to
          request DS removal from the registry, then the registry will
          suspend automation (because the removal request is received
          out-of-band, such as via EPP).  This is independent of whether
          the registry's automation has already seen the signal.  The
          registrar, however, will be aware of the in-band nature of the
          request and not suspend automation (which is also the correct
          result).

       As a side effect, this works towards avoiding redundant
       automation at the registry.

   All in all:

   *  It is advisable to generally not suspend in-band DS automation
      when an out-of-band DS update has occurred.

   *  An exception to this rule is when the entire DS record set was
      removed through an out-of-band request, in which case the
      registrant likely wants to disable DNSSEC for the domain.  DS
      automation should then be suspended so that automatic re-
      initialization (bootstrapping) does not occur.

   *  In all other cases, any properly authenticated DS updates
      received, including through an automated method, are to be
      considered as the current intent of the domain holder.

7.2.3.  Concurrent Automatic Updates

   When the RRR model is used, there is a potential for collision if
   both the registry and the registrar are automating DS provisioning by
   scanning the child for CDS/CDNSKEY records.  No disruptive
   consequences are expected if both parties perform DS automation.  An
   exception is when, during a key rollover, the registry and registrar
   see different versions of the Child's DS update requests, such as
   when CDS/CDNSKEY records are retrieved from different vantage points.
   Although unlikely due to Recommendation 1a of Section 4, this may
   lead to flapping of DS updates.  However, it is not expected to be
   harmful as either DS RRset will allow for the validation function to
   continue to work, as ensured by Recommendation 1b of Section 4.  The
   effect subsides as the Child's state eventually becomes consistent
   (roughly within the child's replication delay); any flapping until
   then will be a minor nuisance only.

   The issue disappears entirely when scanning is replaced by
   notifications that trigger DS maintenance through one party's
   designated endpoint [RFC9859] and can otherwise be mitigated if the
   registry and registrar agree that only one of them will perform
   scanning.

   As a standard aspect of key rollovers [RFC6781], the Child DNS
   operator is expected to monitor propagation of Child zone updates to
   all authoritative nameserver instances and only proceed to the next
   step once replication has succeeded everywhere and the DS record set
   was subsequently updated (and in no case before the DS RRset's TTL
   has passed).  Any breakage resulting from improper timing on the
   Child side is outside of the Parent's sphere of influence and thus
   cannot be handled with only parent-side changes.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Operational Considerations

   The document provides operational recommendations for DNSSEC DS
   automation.  There are no additional operational considerations
   beyond those listed in Appendix A.

10.  Security Considerations

   The recommendations in this document are designed to improve the
   safety and interoperability of DNSSEC delegation maintenance.
   Relevant security implications and various trade-offs are explained
   in the analysis subsections above.  This section notes additional
   aspects worth considering.

   When inconsistencies between CDS/CDNSKEY RRsets are ignored (contrary
   to Recommendation 4.1.1.a), a number of security risks result.  For
   example, when a nameserver domain expires and is re-registered
   maliciously, the adversary may be able to initialize a DS RRset and
   subsequently redelegate the domain using CSYNC synchronization
   [RFC7477], resulting in a full hijack of the domain.  For details,
   refer to Appendix A of [RFC9975].

   Similar risks of total adversarial control exist when the child's SEP
   key is compromised, as this key can authorize DS update or removal
   requests if consistently published on all nameservers.  This
   reinforces that loss of key control poses severe risks; utmost care
   must be taken when managing SEP keys.

   When a domain is stripped of its DNSSEC protection by removing the DS
   RRset -- either manually or using an automatic delete signal
   (Recommendation 7.1.3) -- DNSSEC security guarantees and associated
   benefits are no longer in effect.  For example, an email operator may
   enforce DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) [RFC7672]
   for domains previously observed to support it and, as a result,
   experience a service disruption in email delivery.  Both child and
   parent DNS operators MUST take such service disruptions into account
   when considering removal of the DS RRset for their zone.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [DNSKEY-IANA]
              IANA, "DNS Security Algorithm Numbers",
              <https://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-sec-alg-numbers>.

   [DS-IANA]  IANA, "DNSSEC Delegation Signer (DS) Resource Record (RR)
              Type Digest Algorithms",
              <https://www.iana.org/assignments/ds-rr-types>.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, DOI 10.17487/RFC1035,
              November 1987, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1035>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7344]  Kumari, W., Gudmundsson, O., and G. Barwood, "Automating
              DNSSEC Delegation Trust Maintenance", RFC 7344,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7344, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7344>.

   [RFC8078]  Gudmundsson, O. and P. Wouters, "Managing DS Records from
              the Parent via CDS/CDNSKEY", RFC 8078,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8078, March 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8078>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8590]  Gould, J. and K. Feher, "Change Poll Extension for the
              Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)", RFC 8590,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8590, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8590>.

   [RFC9364]  Hoffman, P., "DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC)", BCP 237,
              RFC 9364, DOI 10.17487/RFC9364, February 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9364>.

   [RFC9499]  Hoffman, P. and K. Fujiwara, "DNS Terminology", BCP 219,
              RFC 9499, DOI 10.17487/RFC9499, March 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9499>.

   [RFC9567]  Arends, R. and M. Larson, "DNS Error Reporting", RFC 9567,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9567, April 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9567>.

   [RFC9615]  Thomassen, P. and N. Wisiol, "Automatic DNSSEC
              Bootstrapping Using Authenticated Signals from the Zone's
              Operator", RFC 9615, DOI 10.17487/RFC9615, July 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9615>.

   [RFC9859]  Stenstam, J., Thomassen, P., and J. Levine, "Generalized
              DNS Notifications", RFC 9859, DOI 10.17487/RFC9859,
              September 2025, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9859>.

   [RFC9975]  Thomassen, P., "Clarifications on CDS/CDNSKEY and CSYNC
              Consistency", RFC 9975, DOI 10.17487/RFC9975, May 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9975>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [LowTTL]   Špaček, P., "DS and DNSKEY low TTL experiments", DNS OARC
              41, 6 September 2023, <https://indico.dns-
              oarc.net/event/47/contributions/1010/attachments/958/1811/
              DS%20and%20DNSKEY%20TTL%20experiment.pdf>.

   [RDAP-TTL] Brown, G., "RDAP Extension for DNS Time-To-Live (TTL
              Values)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              regext-rdap-ttl-extension-12, 27 May 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-regext-
              rdap-ttl-extension-12>.

   [RFC5730]  Hollenbeck, S., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)",
              STD 69, RFC 5730, DOI 10.17487/RFC5730, August 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5730>.

   [RFC5731]  Hollenbeck, S., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP)
              Domain Name Mapping", STD 69, RFC 5731,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5731, August 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5731>.

   [RFC6781]  Kolkman, O., Mekking, W., and R. Gieben, "DNSSEC
              Operational Practices, Version 2", RFC 6781,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6781, December 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6781>.

   [RFC6840]  Weiler, S., Ed. and D. Blacka, Ed., "Clarifications and
              Implementation Notes for DNS Security (DNSSEC)", RFC 6840,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6840, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6840>.

   [RFC7477]  Hardaker, W., "Child-to-Parent Synchronization in DNS",
              RFC 7477, DOI 10.17487/RFC7477, March 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7477>.

   [RFC7672]  Dukhovni, V. and W. Hardaker, "SMTP Security via
              Opportunistic DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities
              (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7672,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7672, October 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7672>.

   [RFC9803]  Brown, G., "Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP) Mapping
              for DNS Time-to-Live (TTL) Values", RFC 9803,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9803, June 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9803>.

   [SAC126]   ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC),
              "SAC126: DNSSEC Delegation Signer (DS) Record Automation",
              12 August 2024, <https://itp.cdn.icann.org/en/files/
              security-and-stability-advisory-committee-ssac-reports/
              sac-126-16-08-2024-en.pdf>.

Appendix A.  Recommendations Overview

   For ease of review and referencing, the recommendations from this
   document are reproduced here without further comment.  For background
   and analysis, refer to Sections 4-7.

A.1.  Acceptance Checks and Safety Measures

   1.  Entities performing automated DS maintenance MUST verify:

       a.  the unambiguous intent of each DS bootstrapping or update
           request as per [RFC9975], by checking its consistency both

           *  between any published CDS and CDNSKEY records and

           *  across all authoritative nameservers in the delegation,

           and

       b.  that the resulting DS record set would allow continued DNSSEC
           validation if deployed

       and cancel the update if the verifications do not succeed.

   2.  Parent-side entities (such as registries) SHOULD allow for
       effective rollback by reducing a DS record set's TTL to a value
       between 5-15 minutes when a new set of records is published, and
       restore the previous (or, if unavailable, default) TTL value at a
       later occasion (but not before the previous DS RRset's TTL has
       expired).

       Besides a prudent choice of TTL, prompt DS changes also require
       timely discovery of update requests.  For recommended methods,
       see Section 4.2.2.

   3.  DNS operators MUST publish both CDNSKEY and CDS records (unless
       the parent's preference is known) and follow best practice for
       the choice of hash digest type [DS-IANA].

A.2.  Reporting and Transparency

   1.  For certain DS updates (see analysis (Section 5.2)) and for DS
       deactivation, relevant points of contact known to the parent-side
       entity (registry or registrar) SHOULD be notified.

   2.  For error conditions, the child DNS operator and the domain's
       technical contact (if applicable) SHOULD be notified first.  The
       registrant SHOULD NOT be notified unless the problem persists for
       a prolonged amount of time (e.g., three days).

   3.  Child DNS operators SHOULD be notified of errors using a report
       query [RFC9567] to the agent domain as described in Section 4 of
       [RFC9859].  Note that this requires listening to notifications
       and that appropriate notification targets are in place (Section 3
       of [RFC9859]).

       Notifications to humans (domain holder) will be performed in
       accordance with the communication preferences established with
       the parent-side entity.  The same condition SHOULD NOT be
       reported unnecessarily frequently to the same recipient.

   4.  In the RRR model, registries performing DS automation SHOULD
       inform the registrar of any DS record changes via the EPP Change
       Poll Extension [RFC8590] or a similar channel.

   5.  The currently active DS configuration SHOULD be made accessible
       to the registrant (or their designated party) through the
       customer portal available for domain management.  The DS update
       history MAY be made available in the same way.

A.3.  Registration Locks

   1.  To secure ongoing operations, automated DS maintenance MUST NOT
       be suspended based on a registrar update lock alone (such as EPP
       status clientUpdateProhibited [RFC5731]).

   2.  When performed by the registry, automated DS maintenance MUST NOT
       be suspended based on a registry update lock alone (such as EPP
       status serverUpdateProhibited [RFC5731]).

A.4.  Multiple Submitting Parties and Suspension of Automation

   1.  Registries and registrars MUST provide another (e.g., manual)
       channel for DS maintenance in order to enable recovery when the
       Child has lost access to its signing key(s).  This out-of-band
       channel is also needed when a DNS operator does not support DS
       automation or refuses to cooperate.

   2.  DS bootstrapping and update requests MUST be executed at the next
       publication opportunity after verification of their authenticity,
       regardless of whether they are received in-band or via an out-of-
       band channel.

   3.  When processing a CDS/CDNSKEY "delete" signal to remove the
       entire DS record set ([RFC8078], Section 4), DS automation MUST
       NOT be suspended.  For all other removal requests (such as when
       received via EPP or a web form), DS automation SHOULD be
       suspended until a new DS record set has been provisioned, in
       order to prevent accidental re-initialization when the registrant
       intended to disable DNSSEC.

   4.  Whenever a non-empty DS record set is provisioned, through
       whichever channel, DS automation SHOULD NOT (or no longer) be
       suspended (including after an earlier removal).

   5.  In the RRR model, a registry MUST NOT automatically initialize DS
       records when it is known that the registrar does not provide a
       way for the domain holder to later disable DNSSEC.  If the
       registrar has declared that it performs automated DS maintenance,
       the registry SHOULD publish the registrar's notification endpoint
       [RFC9859] (if applicable) instead of their own and refrain from
       registry-side DS automation.

Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the members of ICANN's Security and
   Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) who wrote the [SAC126] report on
   which this document is based.

   Additional thanks are extended to the following individuals (in the
   order of their first contribution or review): Barbara Jantzen, Matt
   Pounsett, Matthijs Mekking, Ondřej Caletka, Oli Schacher, Kim Davies,
   Jim Reid, Q Misell, Scott Hollenbeck, Tamás Csillag, Philip Homburg,
   Shumon Huque (Document Shepherd), Libor Peltan, Josh Simpson, Johan
   Stenstam, Stefan Ubbink, Viktor Dukhovni, Hugo Salgado, Wes Hardaker,
   Mohamed Boucadair (responsible Area Director), Meir Goldman, Thomas
   Fossati, Peter van Dijk, Jiankang Yao, Donald Eastlake, James Gannon,
   Roman Danyliw, Andy Newton, Éric Vyncke, Mike Bishop, Mahesh
   Jethanandani, Deb Cooley, Charles Eckel, Christopher Inacio, and
   Ketan Talaulikar.

Authors' Addresses

   Steve Sheng
   Email: steve.sheng@gmail.com


   Peter Thomassen
   deSEC
   Email: peter@desec.io
