



Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                        C. Bonnell
Request for Comments: 10007                               DigiCert, Inc.
Updates: 5280                                         伊藤 忠彦 (T. Ito)
Category: Standards Track               セコム株式会社 (SECOM CO., LTD.)
ISSN: 2070-1721                                   大久保 智史 (T. Okubo)
                                            Penguin Securities Pte. Ltd.
                                                               June 2026


    Clarification to Processing Key Usage Values During Certificate
                    Revocation List (CRL) Validation

Abstract

   RFC 5280 defines the profile of X.509 certificates and Certificate
   Revocation Lists (CRLs) for use in the Internet.  Section 4.2.1.3 of
   RFC 5280 requires CRL issuer certificates to contain the keyUsage
   extension with the cRLSign bit asserted.  However, the CRL validation
   algorithm specified in Section 6.3 of RFC 5280 does not explicitly
   include a corresponding check for the presence of the keyUsage
   certificate extension.  This document updates RFC 5280 to require
   that check.

Status of This Memo

   This is an Internet Standards Track document.

   This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
   received public review and has been approved for publication by the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Further information on
   Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC 7841.

   Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
   and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
   https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc10007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
   in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  The Risk of Trusting CRLs Signed with Non-Certified Keys
   4.  Checking the Presence of the keyUsage Extension
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   [RFC5280] defines the profile of X.509 certificates and certificate
   revocation lists (CRLs) for use in the Internet.  Section 4.2.1.3 of
   [RFC5280] requires CRL issuer certificates to contain the keyUsage
   extension with the cRLSign bit asserted.  However, the CRL validation
   algorithm specified in Section 6.3 of [RFC5280] does not explicitly
   include a corresponding check for the presence of the keyUsage
   certificate extension.  This document updates [RFC5280] to require
   that check.

   Section 3 describes the security concern that motivates this update.

   Section 4 updates the CRL validation algorithm (Section 6.3 of
   [RFC5280]) to resolve this concern.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  The Risk of Trusting CRLs Signed with Non-Certified Keys

   In some Public Key Infrastructures, entities are delegated by
   Certification Authorities (CAs) to sign CRLs.  CRLs whose scope
   encompasses certificates that have not been signed by the CRL issuer
   are known as "indirect CRLs".

   Applications that consume CRLs follow the validation algorithm as
   specified in Section 6.3 of [RFC5280].  In particular, Section 6.3.3
   of [RFC5280] contains the following step for CRL validation:

   |  (f) Obtain and validate the certification path for the issuer of
   |  the complete CRL.  The trust anchor for the certification path
   |  MUST be the same as the trust anchor used to validate the target
   |  certificate.  If a key usage extension is present in the CRL
   |  issuer's certificate, verify that the cRLSign bit is set.

   This step does not explicitly specify a check for the presence of the
   keyUsage extension itself.

   Similarly, the certificate profile in Section 4 of [RFC5280] does not
   require the inclusion of the keyUsage extension in a certificate if
   the certified public key is not used for verifying the signatures of
   other certificates or CRLs.

   CAs can delegate the issuance of CRLs to other entities by issuing to
   the entity a certificate that asserts the cRLSign bit in the keyUsage
   extension.  The CA will then sign certificates that fall within the
   scope of the indirect CRL by including the crlDistributionPoints
   extension (Section 4.2.1.13 of [RFC5280]) and specifying the
   distinguished name (DN) of the CRL issuer in the cRLIssuer field of
   the corresponding distribution point.

   The CRL issuer signs CRLs that assert the indirectCRL boolean within
   the issuingDistributionPoint extension.

   The allowance for the issuance of certificates without the keyUsage
   extension and the lack of a check for the inclusion of the keyUsage
   extension during CRL verification can manifest in a security issue.
   A concrete example is described below:

   1.  The CA signs an end-entity CRL issuer certificate to subject X
       that certifies key A for signing CRLs by explicitly including the
       keyUsage extension and asserting the cRLSign bit in accordance
       with Section 4.2.1.3 of [RFC5280].

   2.  The CA signs one or more certificates that include the
       crlDistributionPoints extension with the DN for subject X
       included in the cRLIssuer field.  This indicates that the CRL-
       based revocation information for these certificates will be
       provided by subject X.

   3.  The CA signs an end-entity certificate to subject X that
       certifies key B.  This certificate contains no key usage
       extension, as the certified key is not intended to be used for
       signing CRLs and could be a "mundane" certificate of any type
       (e.g., S/MIME, a document signing certificate where the
       corresponding private key is stored on the file system of the
       secretary's laptop, etc.).

   4.  Subject X signs a CRL using key B and publishes the CRL at the
       distributionPoint field specified in the crlDistributionPoints
       extension of the certificates signed in step 2.

   5.  Relying parties download the CRL published in step 4.  The CRL
       validates successfully according to Section 6.3.3 of [RFC5280],
       as the CRL issuer DN matches, and the check for the presence of
       the cRLSign bit in the keyUsage extension is skipped because the
       keyUsage extension is absent.

4.  Checking the Presence of the keyUsage Extension

   To remediate the security issue described in Section 3, this document
   specifies the following amendment to step (f) of the CRL algorithm as
   specified in Section 6.3.3 of [RFC5280].

   _OLD:_

   |  (f) Obtain and validate the certification path for the issuer of
   |  the complete CRL.  The trust anchor for the certification path
   |  MUST be the same as the trust anchor used to validate the target
   |  certificate.  If a key usage extension is present in the CRL
   |  issuer's certificate, verify that the cRLSign bit is set.

   _NEW:_

   |  (f) Obtain and validate the certification path for the issuer of
   |  the complete CRL.  The trust anchor for the certification path
   |  MUST be the same as the trust anchor used to validate the target
   |  certificate.  If the version of the CRL issuer's certificate is
   |  version 3 (v3), then verify that the key usage extension is
   |  present and verify that the cRLSign bit is set.

   This change ensures that the CRL issuer's key is certified for CRL
   signing.  However, this check is not performed if the CRL issuer's
   key is certified using a version 1 (v1) or version 2 (v2) X.509
   certificate, as these versions do not have an extensions field where
   the key usage extension can be included.

5.  Security Considerations

   If a CA has signed certificates to be used for CRL verification but
   do not include the keyUsage extension in accordance with
   Section 4.2.1.3 of [RFC5280], then relying party applications that
   have implemented the modified verification algorithm as specified in
   this document will be unable to verify CRLs signed by the CRL issuer
   in question.

   It is RECOMMENDED that CAs include the keyUsage extension in
   certificates to be used for CRL verification to ensure that there are
   no interoperability issues where updated applications are unable to
   verify CRLs.

   If it is not possible to update the profile of CRL issuer
   certificates, then the policy management authority of the affected
   Public Key Infrastructure SHOULD update the subject naming
   requirements to ensure that certificates to be used for different
   purposes contain unique DNs.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5280>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the participants on the LAMPS Working
   Group mailing list for their insightful feedback and comments.  In
   particular, the authors extend sincere appreciation to Carl Wallace,
   David Hook, Deb Cooley, John Gray, Michael StJohns, Mike Ounsworth,
   Mohamed Boucadair, Russ Housley, Serge Mister, and Tomas Gustavsson
   for their reviews and suggestions, which greatly improved the quality
   of this document.

Authors' Addresses

   Corey Bonnell
   DigiCert, Inc.
   Email: corey.bonnell@digicert.com


   Tadahiko Ito
   SECOM CO., LTD.
   Email: tadahiko.ito.public@gmail.com

   Additional contact information:

      伊藤 忠彦
      セコム株式会社


   Tomofumi Okubo
   Penguin Securities Pte. Ltd.
   Email: tomofumi.okubo+ietf@gmail.com

   Additional contact information:

      大久保 智史
      Penguin Securities Pte. Ltd.
