



Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                       J. Peterson
Request for Comments: 9970                                    TransUnion
Category: Standards Track                                       C. Wendt
ISSN: 2070-1721                                                    Somos
                                                               June 2026


   Connected Identity for Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR)

Abstract

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Identity header field conveys
   cryptographic identity information about the originators of SIP
   requests.  However, the Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR)
   framework provides no means for determining the identity of the
   called party in a conventional telephone-calling scenario.  This
   document updates prior guidance on the "connected identity" problem
   to reflect the changes to SIP identity that accompanied STIR.  It
   also considers a revised problem space for connected identity as a
   means of detecting calls that have been retargeted to a party
   impersonating the intended destination and preventing the spoofing of
   mid-dialog or dialog-terminating events by intermediaries or third
   parties.

Status of This Memo

   This is an Internet Standards Track document.

   This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
   received public review and has been approved for publication by the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Further information on
   Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC 7841.

   Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
   and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
   https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9970.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
   in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Connected Identity Problem Statement for STIR
   4.  Connected Identity without Diversion
   5.  Connected Identity with Diversion
   6.  Connected Identity in Mid-Dialog and Dialog-Terminating
           Requests
   7.  Authorization Policy for Callers
   8.  Creating Pre-Association with Destinations
   9.  The "rsp" PASSporT Type
   10. UPDATE Procedures for Provisional Dialogs
   11. IANA Considerations
   12. Privacy Considerations
   13. Security Considerations
   14. References
     14.1.  Normative References
     14.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] initiates sessions,
   and as a step in establishing sessions, it exchanges information
   about the parties at both ends.  Called users review information
   about the calling party, for example, to determine whether to accept
   communications initiated by SIP), in the same way that users of the
   telephone network assess "Caller ID" information before picking up
   calls.  This information may sometimes be consumed by automated
   systems to make authorization decisions.  STIR [RFC8224] provides a
   cryptographic assurance of the identity of calling parties in order
   to prevent impersonation, which is a key enabler of unwanted
   robocalls, swatting, vishing, voicemail hacking, and similar attacks
   (see [RFC7375]).

   A related problem also exists: The identity of the party who answers
   a call can differ from that of the initial called party for various
   innocuous reasons such as call forwarding.  In certain network
   environments, however, it is possible for attackers to hijack the
   route of a called number and direct it to a resource controlled by
   the attacker.  It can potentially be difficult to determine why a
   call reached a target other than the one originally intended and
   whether the party ultimately reached by the call is one that the
   caller should trust.  Moreover, the lack of mutual authentication of
   parties makes it possible for outside attackers to inject forged
   messages (e.g., BYE) into a SIP session.

   The property of providing the identity of the called party to the
   calling party is called "connected identity".  Previous work on
   connected identity focused on fixing the core semantics of SIP.
   [RFC4916] allows a mid-dialog request, such as an UPDATE [RFC3311],
   to convey identity in either direction within the context of an
   existing INVITE-initiated dialog.  [RFC4916] also allows that UPDATE
   to alter the From header field value for requests in the backwards
   direction; this is an update to the behavior described in [RFC3261],
   which requires that the From header field values sent in requests in
   the backwards direction reflect the To header field value of the
   dialog-forming request.  Under the original rules in [RFC3261], if
   Alice sent a dialog-forming request to Bob, then even if Bob's SIP
   service forwarded that dialog-forming request to Carol, Carol would
   still be required to put Bob's identity in the From header field
   value in any mid-dialog requests in the backwards direction.

   One of the original motivating use cases for [RFC4916] was the use of
   connected identity with the SIP Identity header field [RFC4474].
   While a mid-dialog request in the backwards direction (e.g., UPDATE)
   can be signed with identity like any other SIP request, forwarded
   requests would not be properly signed without the ability to change
   the mid-dialog From header field value.  Thus, Carol would not be
   able to furnish a key to sign for Bob's identity if Carol wanted to
   sign requests in the backwards direction.  Carol would, however, be
   able to sign for her own identity in the From header field value if
   mid-dialog requests in the backwards direction were permitted to vary
   from the original To header field value.

   With the obsolescence of [RFC4474] by [RFC8224], this specification
   adapts the connected identity concepts of [RFC4916] to STIR,
   reflecting the changes to the SIP Identity header field and the
   revised problem space that STIR introduces.  It also explores some
   new features that would be enabled by connected identity for STIR,
   including the use of connected identity to prevent route hijacking
   and to notify callers when an expected called party has successfully
   been reached.  This document also addresses concerns about applying
   connected identity [RFC4916] to STIR discussed in the SIPBRANDY
   framework [RFC8862].

   One area of connected identity that is not explored in this document
   is the implications for conferencing, especially meshed conferencing
   systems.  The scope of this mechanism is solely two-party
   communications; multiparty sharing of connected identity is left for
   future work.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document assumes familiarity with common messages, response
   codes, and header fields used in SIP [RFC3261] and the elements
   present in the Personal Assertion Token (PASSporT) [RFC8225] format.

3.  Connected Identity Problem Statement for STIR

   The STIR problem statement [RFC7340] enumerates robocalling,
   voicemail hacking, vishing, and swatting as problems with the modern
   telephone network that are enabled, or abetted, by impersonation,
   i.e., the ability of a calling party to arbitrarily set the telephone
   number that will be rendered to end users to identify the caller.

   Today, sophisticated adversaries can redirect calls on the Public
   Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) to destinations other than the
   intended called party.  For some call centers, like those associated
   with financial institutions, healthcare, and emergency services, an
   attacker could hope to gain valuable information about people or to
   prevent some classes of important services.  Moreover, on the
   Internet, the lack of any centralized or even federated routing
   system for telephone numbers has resulted in deployments where the
   routing of calls is arbitrary: Calls to telephone numbers might be
   dumped on a PSTN gateway, they might be sent to a default
   intermediary that makes forwarding decisions based on a local
   configuration file, potentially using various mechanisms such as
   consulting a private ENUM [RFC6116], or routing might be determined
   in some other, domain-specific way.  In short, there are numerous
   attack surfaces that an adversary could explore to attempt to
   redirect calls for a particular number to someplace other than the
   intended destination.

   Another motivating use case for connected identity is mid-dialog
   requests, including BYE.  The potential for an intermediary to
   generate a forged BYE in the backwards direction has always been
   built in to the stateful dialog management of SIP.  For example,
   there is a class of mobile fraud attacks ("call stretching") that
   rely on intermediary networks making it appear to one side as if a
   call has terminated, while maintaining that the call is still active
   to the other side, in order to create a billing discrepancy that
   could be pocketed by the intermediary.  If BYE requests in both
   directions of a SIP dialog could be authenticated with STIR, in the
   same way as dialog-forming requests, then another impersonation
   vector leading to fraud in the telephone network could be shut down.

   Finally, telephone numbers are widely used today for two-factor
   authentication (TFA) prior to accessing web resources, which
   typically rely on sharing some sort of one-time password or similar
   unique link to validate control of a telephone number.  These systems
   are often capable of using either telephone calls or messages for
   TFA.  Connected identity is very valuable for these use cases because
   it gives a strong assurance to the calling party that they have in
   fact reached the telephone for the called telephone number.

   However, there are practical limits to what securing the signaling
   can achieve.  [RFC4916] rightly observes that once a SIP call has
   been answered, the called party can be replaced by a different party
   (with a different identity) due to call transfer, call park and
   retrieval, and so on.  In some cases, due to the presence of a back-
   to-back user agent, it can be effectively impossible for the calling
   party to know that this has happened.  The problem statement
   considered for STIR focuses solely on signaling, not whether media
   from the connected party should be rendered to the caller when a
   dialog has been established.  This specification does not consider
   further any threats that arise from a substitution of media, though
   [RFC8862] contains related guidance.

4.  Connected Identity without Diversion

   In straightforward call setup, the address-of-record (AoR) of the
   party reached by an INVITE corresponds to the "dest" field of the
   PASSporT in the INVITE's Identity header field value.  The calling
   party will, however, have no secure assurance that they have reached
   the proper party if an Identity header field cannot be sent to them
   in the backwards direction.  Provided that the terminating side of
   the dialog is STIR-capable, they should have the capacity to sign a
   PASSporT for the AoR of the called party.

   This specification therefore adds provisional and final SIP
   responses, including the 100, 180, 183, and 200 responses, to the set
   of messages that may contain an Identity header field.  PASSporTs
   that appear in SIP responses SHOULD use a "ppt" of "rsp", which is
   defined in Section 9 (although "div" [RFC8946] may additionally
   appear in responses, per Section 5).  PASSporTs of the "rsp" type
   will be referred to throughout this specification as "rsp" PASSporTs.
   At a high level, an "rsp" PASSporT is signed similarly to the "div"
   PASSporT [RFC8946], insofar as the certificate that signs an "rsp"
   PASSporT is signing the "dest" field rather than the "orig" field.
   If the terminating side does not possess an appropriate credential to
   sign for the value of the "dest" element value in the PASSporT, it
   MUST NOT sign and send an "rsp" PASSporT in the backwards direction.

   While it might seem attractive to provide identity for SIP failure
   response codes (4XX, 5XX, 6XX), those explicitly do not form dialogs
   or connections and are thus outside the scope of this specification.
   The same applies to SIP redirect (3XX) response codes, though see
   Section 7 of [RFC8946] for guidance on authentication redirection.

   It is worth noting that at the time [RFC4916] was written, the
   identity mechanism was far stricter about what counted as retargeting
   than is described in [RFC8224], which has canonicalization processes
   that eliminate minor changes to the URIs, especially when telephone
   numbers are the identifiers used by the caller and callee.  For basic
   use cases, a PASSporT in a 183 or 200 OK should be sufficient to
   secure media keys for the purposes of SIPBRANDY [RFC8862].

   The handling of an "rsp" PASSporT differs from the handling of a
   PASSporT received in a SIP request.  Most importantly, note that SIP
   responses cannot be rejected, unlike SIP requests -- there is no way
   for the recipient of a response to report errors to the sender.  The
   only protocol action that the calling party could take upon receiving
   a response carrying a problem PASSporT is to issue a CANCEL (for
   provisional dialogs) or BYE request in order to tear down the dialog
   (see Section 7).  Moreover, provisional responses are not reliably
   delivered without using 100rel and Provisional Response
   Acknowledgement (PRACK) [RFC3262], and provisional responses may be
   consumed (without forwarding) by intermediaries under a variety of
   conditions.  In short, their delivery is not guaranteed.

5.  Connected Identity with Diversion

   Use cases involving authorized retargeting motivate connected
   identity.  When a call acquires a new target (in its Request-URI)
   during transit, then the destination will no longer correspond to the
   target, the "dest" specified by the PASSporT in the dialog-forming
   request.  If a PASSporT in a response came signed by a different
   destination than the caller intended, why should the caller trust it?

   In STIR, the "div" PASSporT type [RFC8946] was created to securely
   record when a call was retargeted from one destination to another.
   Those "div" PASSporTs can be consumed on the terminating side by
   verification services to determine that a call has reached its
   eventual destination for the right reasons.  As [RFC8946] explains
   the situation, the only way those diversion PASSporTs will be seen by
   the calling party is if redirection is used (SIP 3XX responses)
   instead of retargeting.  Because some network policies aim to conceal
   service logic from the originating party, sending redirections in the
   backwards direction is the only currently defined way for secure
   indications of redirection to be revealed to the calling party.  That
   in turn would allow the calling user agent to have a strong assurance
   that legitimate entities in the call path caused the request to reach
   a party that the caller did not anticipate.

   This specification introduces another alternative.  When sending an
   "rsp" PASSporT type in a SIP response, a User Agent Server (UAS) MAY
   also include (in Identity header field values) any "div" PASSporTs it
   received in the INVITE that initiated this dialog.  Thus, PASSporTs
   of type "div" MAY also appear in SIP responses.  These "div"
   PASSporTs can enable the originating side to receive a secure
   assurance that the call is being fielded by the proper recipient per
   the routing of the call.  In this case, the "dest" signed in the
   "rsp" PASSporT MUST be the address-of-record of the party who was
   reached rather than the "dest" of the PASSporT received in the
   dialog-initiating INVITE.

   An "rsp" PASSporT that signs a different "dest" than the one that
   appeared in the PASSporT of the dialog-forming request MUST send at
   least one "div" PASSporT with it.  If no "div" PASSporTs were
   received in a dialog-forming request with a different "dest" value
   than the original PASSporT claimed, then "rsp" PASSporTs MUST NOT be
   used in responses. "div" is not universally supported, so calls MAY
   be retargeted without generating a "div" PASSporT, in which case the
   use of "rsp" PASSporTs will not be possible.  Note that the decision
   to trust any "div" or "rsp" PASSporT is, as always in STIR, a matter
   of local policy of the relying parties: Some stricter systems may not
   want to trust any "rsp" that differs from the "dest" in the PASSporT
   of the original request.

   Note that sending "div" PASSporTs in the backwards direction will
   potentially reveal service logic to the called party.  As presumably
   this service logic is enacted on behalf of the called party, the
   called party can make a policy determination about reflecting those
   "div" PASSporTs back to the caller; connected identity may not be
   compatible with some operator policies.

   This mechanism does not require altering the value of the From header
   field value in requests or responses in the backwards direction.
   While this was a major concern of [RFC4916], in many operating
   environments, the From header field value does not even contain the
   identity of the caller that has been asserted by the network, which
   is instead conveyed by the P-Asserted-Identity (PAID) header field
   [RFC3325].  The contents of PAID were never used for dialog matching,
   and so in environments where PAID is used, it can be altered more
   dynamically than the From header field (moreover, by introducing tag
   parameters to the To and From header field values, [RFC3261]
   eliminates the need for stability in From values for dialog
   identification some time ago).  For retargeting that utilizes the
   "from-change" option tag in [RFC4916], see Section 10.  STIR is, in
   general, more flexible in constructing the "dest" than the Identity
   header field managed addresses-of-record at the time [RFC4916] was
   written.

6.  Connected Identity in Mid-Dialog and Dialog-Terminating Requests

   The use of the connected identity mechanism specified in this
   document is not limited to provisional dialog requests.  Once a
   dialog has been established with connected identity, any re-INVITEs
   from either the originating and terminating side, as well as any BYE
   requests, SHOULD contain Identity header fields with valid PASSporTs.
   If only the terminating side supports connected identity, obviously
   the originator cannot be expected to know that it needs to send
   PASSporTs for subsequent requests like BYE.  Doing so prevents third
   parties from spoofing any mid-dialog requests in order to redirect
   media or similarly interfere with communications, and it also
   prevents denial-of-service teardowns by attackers.

   Theoretically, any SIP requests in a dialog could be signed in this
   fashion, though it is unclear how valuable it would be for some
   (e.g., OPTIONS).  Requests with specialized payloads such as INFO or
   MESSAGE, however, would require additional specification for how
   integrity protection for their bodies could be implemented.  Some
   work has been done toward that for MESSAGE (see [RFC9475]).  This
   specification thus does not recommend PASSporTs for any requests sent
   in a dialog other than INVITE, UPDATE, and BYE.

   It might seem tempting to require that, if an INVITE has been sent
   with an Identity header field containing a PASSporT, any CANCEL
   request received for the dialog initiated by that INVITE must also
   contain an Identity header field with a PASSporT.  However, CANCEL
   requests can also be sent by stateful proxy servers engaged in
   parallel forking, for example, when branches need to be canceled
   because a final response has been received from a UAS.  This
   specification does not forbid a User Agent Client (UAC) from sending
   a CANCEL for its own PASSporT-protected INVITE requests, as there may
   be limited use cases where it would be useful to relying parties, but
   recipients of a CANCEL should not expect PASSporTs to be present in
   connected identity cases.

   Mid-dialog requests also require special handling in diversion cases.
   Relying parties who intended to trust an "rsp" PASSporT MUST validate
   any "div" chain back to the "rsp" PASSporT on any Identity header
   field values received in responses (per [RFC8946]).  The dialog
   initiator can then treat the certificate that signed that "rsp"
   PASSporT as the appropriate certificate to sign any further mid-
   dialog or dialog-terminating requests received in the backwards
   direction.  Furthermore, the "dest" element value in any requests or
   responses sent in the backwards direction during this dialog MUST be
   the same as the "dest" element value in the first response to the
   dialog-forming request that contains a PASSporT -- unless the "from-
   change" extension is used, per Section 10.

7.  Authorization Policy for Callers

   In a conventional telephone call, the called party receives an
   alerting signal and can make a decision about whether or not to pick
   up a phone.  They may have access to displayed information, like
   "Caller ID", to help them arrive at an authorization decision.
   However, the situation is more complicated for callers because they
   typically expect to be connected to the proper destination and are
   often holding telephones in a position that would not enable them to
   see displayed information if any were available for them to review.
   Moreover, their most direct response to a security breach would be to
   hang up the call they were in the middle of placing.

   While this specification does not prescribe any user experience
   associated with placing a call, it assumes that callers might have
   some way to a set an authorization posture that will result in the
   right thing happening when the connected identity is not as expected.
   This is analogous to a situation where Secure Real-time Transport
   Protocol (SRTP) negotiation fails because the keys exchanged at the
   media layer do not match the fingerprints exchanged at the signaling
   layer: When a user requests confidentiality services and they are
   unavailable, media should not be exchanged.  Thus, we assume that
   users have a way in their interface to require this criticality, on a
   per-call basis or perhaps on a per-destination basis.  Users will not
   always place calls where the connected identity is crucial, but when
   they do, they should have a way to tell their devices that the call
   should not be completed if it arrives at an unexpected or
   unauthenticated party.

8.  Creating Pre-Association with Destinations

   Any connected identity mechanism will work best if the user knows
   before initiating a call that connected identity is supported by the
   destination side.  Not every institution that a user wants to connect
   to securely will support STIR and connected identity out of the gate.
   Some sort of directory service might exist that advertises support
   for connected identity, which institutions then could use to inform
   potential callers that, if connected identity is not supported when
   reaching them with SIP, there is a potential security problem.
   Similarly, user devices might keep some sort of log recording that a
   destination previously supported connected identity, so that if
   support is unavailable later, calling users could be alerted to a
   potential security problem.

   The user interface of modern smartphones supports an address book
   from which users select telephone numbers to dial.  Even when dialing
   a number manually, the interface frequently checks the address book,
   which will display to users any provisioned name for the target of
   the call if one exists.  Similarly, when clicking on a telephone
   number viewed on a web page or similar service, smartphones often
   prompt users to approve the access to the outbound dialer.  These
   sorts of decision points, when the user is still interacting with the
   user interface before a call is placed, provide an opportunity to
   probe what identity would be reached as a destination and potentially
   even to exchange STIR PASSporTs in order to validate whether or not
   the expected destination can be reached securely.  Again, this is
   probably most meaningful for contacting financial, government, or
   emergency services, for cases where reaching an unintended
   destination may have serious consequences.

   The establishment of media-less dialogs has long been specified as a
   component of third-party call control in SIP [RFC3725], in which an
   INVITE is sent with no Session Description Protocol (SDP).  Similar
   media-less dialogs have been proposed for certain automated systems
   per [RFC5552].  In the STIR context, a media-less dialog is
   established by sending an INVITE with an Identity header field but no
   SDP.  When a STIR-aware UAS that supports this specification receives
   an INVITE that has no SDP, carries a PASSporT, and includes a 100rel
   in the Require header field value, it SHOULD follow the mechanism
   described in Section 4 to send a provisional response carrying a
   PASSporT in the backwards direction.  The PASSporT received in the
   backwards direction could be rendered to the originating user to help
   them decide if they want to place the call.

9.  The "rsp" PASSporT Type

   This specification defines an "rsp" PASSporT type that is sent only
   in SIP responses; it MUST NOT be sent in SIP requests.  Any "rsp"
   PASSporTs received in requests MUST be ignored.

   The header of an "rsp" PASSporT shows a "ppt" of "rsp":

   { "typ":"passport",
     "ppt":"rsp",
     "alg":"ES256",
     "x5u":"https://www.example.com/cert.pem" }

   The payload of an "rsp" PASSporT looks entirely like a normal
   PASSporT -- the only difference is in semantics, as the PASSporT is
   signed to authenticate the "dest" claim value rather than the "orig".

      { "orig":{"tn":"12155551212"},
        "dest":{"tn":["12155551214"]},
        "iat":1443208345 }

   No restrictions are placed here on additional elements appearing in
   the payload of an "rsp" type PASSporT.

10.  UPDATE Procedures for Provisional Dialogs

   [RFC4916] identifies a means of sending Identity header field values
   in the backwards direction before a final response to a dialog has
   been received by the UAC.  It relies on negotiating support for
   "from-change" options tags on both sides, followed by the use of the
   UPDATE method to send the connected identity in the backwards
   direction.  This can only happen after the UAS has received and
   responded to a PRACK [RFC3262] from the UAC, which would in turn have
   been triggered by a provisional 1xx response sent earlier by the UAC.

   However, the complexity of this mechanism makes it impractical to
   deploy for both the primary use case and the diversion use case
   described above.  It may still have utility for corner cases with
   legacy versions of SIP (that date before the addition of the To and
   From header field value tags) or more complex call parking scenarios.
   As such, this specification does not deprecate the "from-change"
   behavior in [RFC4916], nor does it provide an update for it for STIR
   -- that is left for future work.

11.  IANA Considerations

   This specification defines a new PASSporT type for the "Personal
   Assertion Token (PASSporT) Extensions" registry [RFC8225], which
   resides at <https://www.iana.org/assignments/passport/>:

   ppt value:  rsp

   Reference:  RFC 9970, Section 9

12.  Privacy Considerations

   Note that sending connected identity can reveal information about the
   called party.  If a called party does not wish to be identified, it
   is especially important not to share rich call data (RCD) in the
   backwards direction, particular in business-to-consumer calling
   cases.  From a user experience perspective, this would likely work
   similarly to current systems for sharing numbers, names, and even
   pictures from calling parties to called parties -- users have
   considerable control over that experience, and similarly for
   connected identity, this must be an opt-in choice for users.  In
   general, RCD is more commonly used by enterprises than by individual
   users.

13.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of [RFC8224] and [RFC8225] apply to the
   use of the "rsp" PASSporT.  In general, a PASSporT of type "rsp" has
   similar security properties to a diversion ("div") PASSporT
   [RFC8946].  Relying parties leverage an "rsp" PASSporT to determine
   the recipient of a request, and as with "div", the "dest" element of
   an "rsp" PASSporT is signed rather than the "orig" element.

   The major threat that "rsp" addresses is the impersonation of a SIP
   response or mid-dialog/dialog-terminating request.  For the latter,
   this might include forging a BYE for a denial-of-service attack or,
   for example, forging a re-INVITE that negotiates media channels
   controlled by an attacker.  For the former, some form of route
   hijacking or similar attack can be mounted by forging a dialog-
   forming response that appears to the caller to initiate a dialog with
   the intended destination.  The "rsp" mechanism uses PASSporTs to
   provide a non-repudiable assurance of the signer of such responses
   and requests.

   The value of an "rsp" PASSporT to relying parties, as with all
   PASSporTs, depends on the relying party trusting the certificate that
   signs the PASSporT and having a reasonable assurance that the
   certificate in question is eligible to sign responses/requests for
   the number in the "dest" claim of the "rsp" PASSporT.  For STIR
   certificates that use Service Provider Codes (SPCs), effectively the
   relying party knows the network operator who is vouching for that
   "rsp".  This in turn enables traceback and similar mitigations.

   As mentioned in Section 5, the use of "div" along with "rsp" in
   responses may reveal the service logic of diversions to calling
   parties.  However, since the called party ultimately invokes the
   "rsp" mechanism, any necessary policy controls can prevent the
   sending of "rsp" when that service logic must be protected.

   The use of PASSporTs within responses creates a novel potential
   vector for amplification attacks, as many responses may be sent in
   response to a single SIP request, and the presence of a PASSporT
   meaningfully increases the size of SIP responses.  However, given
   that PASSporTs can only be present in responses to requests carrying
   a PASSporT, and thus requests with strong sender authentication,
   called parties have adequate means to authorize the source of
   requests and disregard spoofs intended to trigger amplification
   attacks.

14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3261, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3261>.

   [RFC3262]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Reliability of
              Provisional Responses in Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP)", RFC 3262, DOI 10.17487/RFC3262, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3262>.

   [RFC3311]  Rosenberg, J., "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
              UPDATE Method", RFC 3311, DOI 10.17487/RFC3311, October
              2002, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3311>.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3325, December 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3325>.

   [RFC3725]  Rosenberg, J., Peterson, J., Schulzrinne, H., and G.
              Camarillo, "Best Current Practices for Third Party Call
              Control (3pcc) in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              BCP 85, RFC 3725, DOI 10.17487/RFC3725, April 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3725>.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, DOI 10.17487/RFC4916, June
              2007, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4916>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8224]  Peterson, J., Jennings, C., Rescorla, E., and C. Wendt,
              "Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 8224,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8224, February 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8224>.

   [RFC8225]  Wendt, C. and J. Peterson, "PASSporT: Personal Assertion
              Token", RFC 8225, DOI 10.17487/RFC8225, February 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8225>.

   [RFC8862]  Peterson, J., Barnes, R., and R. Housley, "Best Practices
              for Securing RTP Media Signaled with SIP", BCP 228,
              RFC 8862, DOI 10.17487/RFC8862, January 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8862>.

   [RFC8946]  Peterson, J., "Personal Assertion Token (PASSporT)
              Extension for Diverted Calls", RFC 8946,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8946, February 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8946>.

14.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4474, August 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4474>.

   [RFC5552]  Burke, D. and M. Scott, "SIP Interface to VoiceXML Media
              Services", RFC 5552, DOI 10.17487/RFC5552, May 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5552>.

   [RFC6116]  Bradner, S., Conroy, L., and K. Fujiwara, "The E.164 to
              Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation
              Discovery System (DDDS) Application (ENUM)", RFC 6116,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6116, March 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6116>.

   [RFC7340]  Peterson, J., Schulzrinne, H., and H. Tschofenig, "Secure
              Telephone Identity Problem Statement and Requirements",
              RFC 7340, DOI 10.17487/RFC7340, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7340>.

   [RFC7375]  Peterson, J., "Secure Telephone Identity Threat Model",
              RFC 7375, DOI 10.17487/RFC7375, October 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7375>.

   [RFC9475]  Peterson, J. and C. Wendt, "Messaging Use Cases and
              Extensions for Secure Telephone Identity Revisited
              (STIR)", RFC 9475, DOI 10.17487/RFC9475, December 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9475>.

Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Russ Housley, Jonathan Rosenberg, and Orie
   Steele for their contributions to this specification.

Authors' Addresses

   Jon Peterson
   TransUnion
   Email: jon.peterson@transunion.com


   Chris Wendt
   Somos
   Email: chris@appliedbits.com
