



Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                       A. Banerjee
Request for Comments: 9958                                    T. Reddy.K
Category: Informational                                 D. Schoinianakis
ISSN: 2070-1721                                                    Nokia
                                                            T. Hollebeek
                                                                DigiCert
                                                            M. Ounsworth
                                                                 Entrust
                                                               June 2026


                Post-Quantum Cryptography for Engineers

Abstract

   The advent of a cryptographically relevant quantum computer (CRQC)
   would render state-of-the-art, traditional public key algorithms
   deployed today obsolete, as the mathematical assumptions underpinning
   their security would no longer hold.  To address this, protocols and
   infrastructure must transition to post-quantum algorithms, which are
   designed to resist both traditional and quantum attacks.  This
   document explains why engineers need to be aware of and understand
   post-quantum cryptography (PQC), and it details the impact of CRQCs
   on existing systems and the challenges involved in transitioning to
   post-quantum algorithms.  Unlike previous cryptographic updates, this
   shift may require significant protocol redesign due to the unique
   properties of post-quantum algorithms.

Status of This Memo

   This document is not an Internet Standards Track specification; it is
   published for informational purposes.

   This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
   received public review and has been approved for publication by the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Not all documents
   approved by the IESG are candidates for any level of Internet
   Standard; see Section 2 of RFC 7841.

   Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
   and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
   https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9958.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
   in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Threat of CRQCs on Cryptography
     3.1.  Symmetric Cryptography
     3.2.  Asymmetric Cryptography
     3.3.  Quantum Side-Channel Attacks
   4.  Traditional Cryptographic Primitives That Could Be Replaced by
           PQC
   5.  NIST PQC Algorithms
     5.1.  NIST Candidates Selected for Standardization
       5.1.1.  PQC Key Encapsulation Mechanisms (KEMs)
       5.1.2.  PQC Signatures
   6.  ISO Candidates Selected for Standardization
     6.1.  PQC Key Encapsulation Mechanisms (KEMs)
   7.  Timeline for Transition
   8.  PQC Categories
     8.1.  Lattice-Based Public Key Cryptography
     8.2.  Hash-Based Public Key Cryptography
     8.3.  Code-Based Public Key Cryptography
   9.  KEMs
     9.1.  Authenticated Key Exchange
     9.2.  Security Properties of KEMs
       9.2.1.  IND-CCA2
       9.2.2.  Binding
     9.3.  HPKE
   10. PQC Signatures
     10.1.  Security Properties of PQC Signatures
       10.1.1.  EUF-CMA and SUF-CMA
     10.2.  Details of FN-DSA, ML-DSA, and SLH-DSA
     10.3.  Details of XMSS and LMS
       10.3.1.  LMS Key and Signature Sizes
     10.4.  Hash-then-Sign
   11. NIST Recommendations for Security and Performance Trade-offs
   12. Comparing PQC KEMs/Signatures against Traditional KEMs, Key
           Exchanges, and Signatures
   13. Post-Quantum and Traditional (PQ/T) Hybrid Schemes
     13.1.  PQ/T Hybrid Confidentiality
     13.2.  PQ/T Hybrid Authentication
     13.3.  Hybrid Cryptographic Algorithm Combinations:
            Considerations and Approaches
       13.3.1.  Hybrid Cryptographic Combinations
       13.3.2.  Composite Keys in Hybrid Schemes
       13.3.3.  Key Reuse in Hybrid Schemes
       13.3.4.  Future Directions and Ongoing Research
   14. Impact on Constrained Devices and Networks
   15. Security Considerations
     15.1.  Cryptanalysis
     15.2.  Cryptographic Agility
     15.3.  Jurisdictional Fragmentation
     15.4.  Hybrid Key Exchange and Signatures: Bridging the Gap
            Between PQ/T Cryptography
     15.5.  Caution: Ciphertext Commitment in KEM vs. DH
   16. IANA Considerations
   17. Further Reading and Resources
   18. References
     18.1.  Normative References
     18.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgements
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Quantum computing is no longer just a theoretical concept in
   computational science and physics; it is now an active area of
   research with practical implications.  Considerable research efforts
   and enormous corporate and government funding for the development of
   practical quantum computing systems are currently being invested.  At
   the time this document is published, cryptographically relevant
   quantum computers (CRQCs) that can break widely used asymmetric
   algorithms (also known as public key algorithms) are not yet
   available.  However, there is ongoing research and development in the
   field of quantum computing, with the goal of building more powerful
   and scalable quantum computers.

   One common myth is that quantum computers are faster than
   conventional CPUs and GPUs in all areas.  This is not the case; much
   as GPUs outperform general-purpose CPUs only on specific types of
   problems, quantum computers also have a niche set of problems on
   which they excel.  Unfortunately for cryptographers, integer
   factorization and discrete logarithms, the mathematical problems
   underpinning much of classical public key cryptography, happen to
   fall within the niche in which quantum computers are expected to
   excel.  As quantum technology advances, there is the potential for
   future quantum computers to have a significant impact on current
   cryptographic systems.  Predicting the date of emergence of a CRQC is
   a challenging task, and there is ongoing uncertainty regarding when
   they will become practically feasible [CRQCThreat].

   Extensive research has produced several post-quantum cryptographic
   algorithms that offer the potential to ensure cryptography's survival
   in the quantum computing era.  However, transitioning to a post-
   quantum infrastructure is not a straightforward task, and there are
   numerous challenges to overcome.  It requires a combination of
   engineering efforts, proactive assessment and evaluation of available
   technologies, and a careful approach to product development and
   deployment.

   PQC is sometimes referred to as "quantum-proof", "quantum-safe", or
   "quantum-resistant".  It is the development of cryptographic
   algorithms designed to secure communication and data in a world where
   quantum computers are powerful enough to break traditional
   cryptographic systems, such as RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) and ECC
   (Elliptic Curve Cryptography).  PQC algorithms are intended to be
   resistant to attacks by quantum computers, which use quantum-
   mechanical phenomena to solve mathematical problems that are
   infeasible for classical computers.

   As the threat of CRQCs draws nearer, engineers responsible for
   designing, maintaining, and securing cryptographic systems must
   prepare for the significant changes that the existence of CRQCs will
   bring.  Engineers need to understand how to implement post-quantum
   algorithms in applications, how to evaluate the trade-offs between
   security and performance, and how to ensure backward compatibility
   with current systems where needed.  This is not merely a one-for-one
   replacement of algorithms; in many cases, the shift to PQC will
   involve redesigning protocols and infrastructure to accommodate the
   significant differences in resource utilization and key sizes between
   traditional and PQC algorithms.  Due to the wide-ranging nature of
   these impacts, discussions of protocol changes are integrated
   throughout this document rather than being confined to a single
   section.

   This document aims to provide general guidance to engineers working
   on cryptographic libraries, network security, and infrastructure
   development, where long-term security planning is crucial.  The
   document covers topics such as selecting appropriate PQC algorithms
   and understanding the differences between PQC Key Encapsulation
   Mechanisms (KEMs) and traditional Diffie-Hellman (DH) and RSA-style
   key exchanges, and it provides insights into expected differences in
   keys, ciphertext, signature sizes, and processing times between PQC
   and traditional algorithms.  Additionally, it discusses the potential
   threat to symmetric cryptography and hash functions from CRQCs.

   It is important to remember that asymmetric algorithms (also known as
   public key algorithms) are largely used for secure communications
   between organizations or endpoints that may not have previously
   interacted, so a significant amount of coordination between
   organizations, and within and between ecosystems, needs to be taken
   into account.  Such transitions are some of the most complicated in
   the tech industry and will require staged migrations in which
   upgraded agents need to coexist and communicate with non-upgraded
   agents at a scale never before undertaken.

   The National Security Agency (NSA) of the United States released an
   article on future PQC algorithm requirements for US national security
   systems [CNSA2-0] based on the need to protect against deployments of
   CRQCs in the future.  The German Federal Office for Information
   Security (BSI) has also released a PQC migration and recommendations
   document [BSI-PQC] that largely aligns with United States National
   Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and NSA guidance but
   differs in aspects such as specific PQC algorithm profiles.

   CRQCs pose a threat to both symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic
   schemes.  However, the threat to asymmetric cryptography is
   significantly greater due to Shor's algorithm [Shors], which can
   break widely used public key schemes like RSA and ECC.  Symmetric
   cryptography and hash functions face a lower risk from Grover's
   algorithm [Grovers], although the impact is less severe and can
   typically be mitigated by doubling key and digest lengths where the
   risk applies.  It is crucial for the reader to understand that when
   "PQC" is mentioned in the document, it means asymmetric cryptography
   (or public key cryptography) and not any symmetric algorithms based
   on stream ciphers, block ciphers, hash functions, Message
   Authentication Codes (MACs), etc., which are less vulnerable to
   quantum computers.  This document does not cover topics such as when
   traditional algorithms might become vulnerable (for that, see
   documents such as [QC-DNS] and others).

   This document does not cover unrelated technologies like quantum key
   distribution (QKD) or quantum key generation, which use quantum
   hardware to exploit quantum effects to protect communications and
   generate keys, respectively.  PQC is based on conventional math (not
   on quantum mechanics) and software, and it can be run on any general-
   purpose computer.

   This document does not go into the deep mathematics or technical
   specification of the PQC algorithms but rather provides an overview
   to engineers on the current threat landscape and the relevant
   algorithms designed to help prevent those threats.  Also, the
   cryptographic and algorithmic guidance given in this document should
   be taken as non-authoritative if it conflicts with emerging and
   evolving guidance from the IRTF's Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG).

2.  Terminology

   Quantum computer:  A computer that performs computations using
      quantum-mechanical phenomena such as superposition and
      entanglement.

   Physical qubit:  The basic physical unit in a quantum computer, which
      is prone to noise and errors.

   Logical qubit:  A fault-tolerant qubit constructed from multiple
      physical qubits using quantum error correction; it is the
      effective unit for reliable quantum computation.

   Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC):  Cryptographic algorithms designed
      to be secure against quantum and classical attacks.

   Cryptographically Relevant Quantum Computer (CRQC):  A quantum
      computer with sufficient logical qubits to break traditional
      asymmetric cryptographic algorithms (e.g., RSA or ECC) within a
      practical timeframe.

   Public Key Cryptography (also called Asymmetric Cryptography):  A
      class of cryptographic algorithms in which separate keys are used
      for encryption and decryption or for signing and verification.
      Throughout this document, the terms Public Key Cryptography and
      Asymmetric Cryptography are used interchangeably.

   There is ongoing discussion about whether to use the term "post-
   quantum", "quantum ready", "quantum resistant", or "quantum secure"
   to describe algorithms that resist CRQCs, and a consensus has not yet
   been reached.  NIST has coined the term "post-quantum" to refer to
   the algorithms that participated in its competition-like selection
   process; in this context, the term can be interpreted to mean "the
   set of algorithms that are designed to still be relevant after
   quantum computers exist" and not a statement about their security.
   "Quantum resistant" or "quantum secure" is obviously the goal of
   these algorithms; however, some people have raised concerns that
   labeling a class of algorithms as "quantum resistant" or "quantum
   secure" could lead to confusion if one or more of those algorithms
   are later found to be insecure or to not resist quantum computers as
   much as theory predicted.  "Quantum ready" is often used to refer to
   a solution -- device, appliance, or software stack -- that has
   reached maturity with regard to integration of these new
   cryptographic algorithms.  That said, the authors recognize that
   there is great variability in how these terms are used.  This
   document uses these terms interchangeably to refer to such
   algorithms.

   In this document, the terms "current", "state-of-the-art", and
   "ongoing" refer to work, research, investigations, deployments, or
   developments that are applicable at the time of publication.

3.  Threat of CRQCs on Cryptography

   When considering the security risks associated with the ability of a
   quantum computer to attack traditional cryptography, it is important
   to distinguish between the impact on symmetric algorithms and public
   key ones.  Dr. Peter Shor and Dr. Lov Grover developed two algorithms
   that changed the way the world thinks of security under the presence
   of a CRQC.

   Quantum computers are, by their nature, hybrids of classical and
   quantum computational units.  For example, Shor's algorithm consists
   of a combination of quantum and classical computational steps.  Thus,
   the term "quantum adversary" should be thought of as "quantum-
   enhanced adversary", meaning they have access to both classical and
   quantum computational techniques.

   Although large-scale quantum computers do not yet exist to experiment
   on, the theoretical properties of quantum computation are very well
   understood.  This allows engineers and researchers to reason about
   the upper limits of quantum-enhanced computation and to design
   cryptographic algorithms that are resistant to any conceivable form
   of quantum cryptanalysis.

3.1.  Symmetric Cryptography

   For unstructured data such as symmetric encrypted data or
   cryptographic hashes, although CRQCs can search for specific
   solutions across all possible input combinations (e.g., Grover's
   algorithm), no quantum algorithm is known to break the underlying
   security properties of these classes of algorithms.  Symmetric-key
   cryptography, which includes keyed primitives such as block ciphers
   (e.g., AES) and message authentication mechanisms (e.g., HMAC-
   SHA256), relies on secret keys shared between the sender and receiver
   and remains secure even in a post-quantum world.  Symmetric
   cryptography also includes hash functions (e.g., SHA-256) that are
   used for secure message digesting without any shared key material.
   Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) is a specific construction
   that utilizes a cryptographic hash function and a secret key shared
   between the sender and receiver to produce a message authentication
   code.

   Grover's algorithm is a quantum search algorithm that provides a
   theoretical quadratic speedup for searching an unstructured database,
   compared to traditional search algorithms.  This has led to the
   common misconception that symmetric key lengths need to be doubled
   for quantum security.  When you consider the mapping of hash values
   to their corresponding hash inputs (also known as pre-image) or of
   ciphertext blocks to the corresponding plaintext blocks as an
   unstructured database, then Grover's algorithm theoretically requires
   doubling the key sizes of the symmetric algorithms that are currently
   deployed at the time of publication to counter the quadratic speedup
   and maintain the current security level.  This is because Grover's
   algorithm reduces the amount of operations to break 128-bit symmetric
   cryptography to 2^64 quantum operations, which might sound
   computationally feasible.  However, quantum operations are
   fundamentally different from classical ones, as 2^64 classical
   operations can be efficiently parallelized but 2^64 quantum
   operations must be performed serially, making them infeasible on
   practical quantum computers.

   Grover's algorithm is highly non-parallelizable and even if one
   deploys 2^c computational units in parallel to brute-force a key
   using Grover's algorithm, it will complete in time proportional to
   2^((128-c)/2), or, put simply, using 256 quantum computers will only
   reduce runtime by a factor of 16, 1024 quantum computers will only
   reduce runtime by a factor of 32, and so forth (see [NIST] and
   [Cloudflare]).  Due to this inherent limitation, the general expert
   consensus is that AES-128 remains secure in practice and key sizes do
   not necessarily need to be doubled.

   It would be natural to ask whether future research will develop a
   superior algorithm that could outperform Grover's algorithm in the
   general case.  However, Christof Zalka has shown that Grover's
   algorithm achieves the best possible complexity for this type of
   search, meaning no significantly faster quantum approach is expected
   [Grover-Search].

   Finally, in their evaluation criteria for PQC, NIST is assessing the
   security levels of proposed post-quantum algorithms by comparing them
   against the equivalent traditional and quantum security of AES-128,
   AES-192, and AES-256.  This indicates that NIST is confident in the
   stable security properties of AES, even in the presence of both
   traditional and quantum attacks.  As a result, 128-bit algorithms can
   be considered quantum-safe for the foreseeable future.  However, for
   compliance purposes, some organizations, such as the French National
   Agency for the Security of Information Systems (ANSSI) [ANSSI] and
   the National Security Agency (NSA) (CNSA 2.0) [CNSA2-0], recommend
   the use of AES-256.

3.2.  Asymmetric Cryptography

   "Shor's algorithm" efficiently solves the integer factorization
   problem (and the related discrete logarithm problem), which underpin
   the foundations of the vast majority of public key cryptography that
   the world uses today.  This implies that, if a CRQC is developed,
   today's public key algorithms (e.g., RSA, Diffie-Hellman, and ECC, as
   well as less commonly used variants such as ElGamal [RFC6090] and
   Schnorr signatures [RFC8235]) and protocols would need to be replaced
   by algorithms and protocols that can offer cryptanalytic resistance
   against CRQCs.  Note that Shor's algorithm cannot run solely on a
   classical computer; it requires a CRQC.

   For example, studies show that, if a CRQC existed, it could break
   RSA-2048 in hours or even seconds depending on assumptions about
   error correction [RSAShor] [RSA8HRS] [RSA10SC].  While such machines
   are purely theoretical at the time of writing, this illustrates the
   eventual vulnerability of RSA to CRQCs.

   For structured data such as public keys and signatures, CRQCs can
   fully solve the underlying hard problems used in traditional
   cryptography (see Shor's algorithm).  Because an increase in the size
   of the key pair would not provide a secure solution (short of RSA
   keys that are many gigabytes in size [PQRSA]), a complete replacement
   of the algorithm is needed.  Therefore, post-quantum public key
   cryptography must rely on problems that are different from the ones
   used in traditional public key cryptography (i.e., the integer
   factorization problem, the finite-field discrete logarithm problem,
   and the elliptic-curve discrete logarithm problem).

3.3.  Quantum Side-Channel Attacks

   Cryptographic side-channel attacks exploit physical implementations
   (such as timing, power consumption, or electromagnetic leakage) to
   recover secret keys.

   The field of cryptographic side-channel attacks potentially stands to
   gain a boost in attacker power once cryptanalytic techniques can be
   enhanced with quantum computation techniques [QuantSide].  While a
   full discussion of quantum side-channel techniques is beyond the
   scope of this document, implementers of cryptographic hardware should
   be aware that current best practices for side-channel resistance may
   not be sufficient against quantum adversaries.

4.  Traditional Cryptographic Primitives That Could Be Replaced by PQC

   Any asymmetric cryptographic algorithm based on integer
   factorization, finite field discrete logarithms, or elliptic-curve
   discrete logarithms will be vulnerable to attacks using Shor's
   algorithm on a CRQC.  This document focuses on the principal
   functions of asymmetric cryptography:

   Key agreement and key transport:  Key agreement schemes, typically
      referred to as Diffie-Hellman (DH) or Elliptic Curve Diffie-
      Hellman (ECDH), as well as key transport, typically using RSA
      encryption, are used to establish a shared cryptographic key for
      secure communication.  They are one of the mechanisms that can be
      replaced by PQC, as they are based on existing public key
      cryptography and are therefore vulnerable to Shor's algorithm.  A
      CRQC can employ Shor's algorithm to efficiently find the prime
      factors of a large public key (in the case of RSA), which, in
      turn, can be exploited to derive the private key.  In the case of
      DH, a CRQC has the potential to calculate the discrete logarithm
      of the (short- or long-term) DH public key.  This, in turn, would
      reveal the secret required to derive the symmetric encryption key.

   Digital signatures:  Digital signature schemes are used to
      authenticate the identity of a sender, detect unauthorized
      modifications to data, and underpin trust in a system.  Similar to
      key agreement, signatures also depend on a public-private key pair
      based on the same mathematics as for key agreement and key
      transport.  Because of this, a break in existing public key
      cryptography will also affect traditional digital signatures,
      hence the importance of developing post-quantum digital
      signatures.

   Boneh-Boyen-Shacham (BBS) signatures:  BBS signatures are a privacy-
      preserving signature scheme that offers zero-knowledge proof-like
      properties by allowing selective disclosure of specific signed
      attributes without revealing the entire set of signed data.  The
      security of BBS signatures relies on the hardness of the discrete
      logarithm problem, making them vulnerable to Shor's algorithm.  A
      CRQC can break the data authenticity security property of BBS but
      not the data confidentiality (Section 6.9 of [BBS-SIG-SCHEME]).

   Content encryption:  Content encryption typically refers to the
      encryption of the data using symmetric key algorithms, such as
      AES, to ensure confidentiality.  The threat to symmetric
      cryptography is discussed in Section 3.1.

5.  NIST PQC Algorithms

   At the time of writing, NIST has standardized three PQC algorithms,
   with more expected to be standardized in the future (see
   [NISTFINAL]).  These algorithms are not necessarily drop-in
   replacements for traditional asymmetric cryptographic algorithms.
   For instance, RSA [RSA] and ECC [RFC6090] can be used as both a KEM
   and a signature scheme, whereas there is currently no post-quantum
   algorithm that can perform both functions.  When upgrading protocols,
   it is important to replace the existing use of traditional algorithms
   with either a PQC KEM or a PQC signature method, depending on how the
   traditional algorithm was previously being used.  Additionally, KEMs,
   as described in Section 9, present a different API than either key
   agreement or key transport primitives.  As a result, they may require
   protocol-level or application-level changes in order to be
   incorporated.

5.1.  NIST Candidates Selected for Standardization

5.1.1.  PQC Key Encapsulation Mechanisms (KEMs)

   ML-KEM:  Module-Lattice-Based Key-Encapsulation Mechanism.  See FIPS
      203 [ML-KEM].

   HQC:  Hamming Quasi-Cyclic.  See [HQC].  The coding algorithm based
      on the hardness of the syndrome decoding problem for quasi-cyclic
      concatenated Reed-Muller and Reed-Solomon (RMRS) codes in the
      Hamming metric.  Reed-Muller (RM) codes are a class of block
      error-correcting codes commonly used in wireless and deep-space
      communications, while Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are widely used to
      detect and correct multiple-bit errors.  HQC has been selected as
      part of the NIST post-quantum cryptography project but has not yet
      been standardized.

5.1.2.  PQC Signatures

   ML-DSA:  Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Algorithm.  See FIPS
      204 [ML-DSA].

   SLH-DSA:  Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Algorithm.  See FIPS
      205 [SLH-DSA].

   FN-DSA:  Fast-Fourier Transform over NTRU-Lattice-Based Digital
      Signature Algorithm.  See [FN-DSA]; note that NIST has named this
      algorithm "FN-DSA" and assigned "FIPS 206" for its specification,
      but at the time of this document's publication, it has not yet
      been released.

   For more information about these, see Sections 8.1, 8.2, and 10.2.

6.  ISO Candidates Selected for Standardization

   At the time of writing, ISO has selected three PQC KEM algorithms as
   candidates for standardization; these are mentioned in the following
   subsection.

6.1.  PQC Key Encapsulation Mechanisms (KEMs)

   FrodoKEM:  KEM based on the hardness of learning with errors in
      algebraically unstructured lattices.  See [FrodoKEM].

   ClassicMcEliece:  KEM based on the hardness of syndrome decoding of
      Goppa codes.  Goppa codes are a class of error-correcting codes
      that can correct a certain number of errors in a transmitted
      message.  The decoding problem involves recovering the original
      message from the received noisy codeword.  See [ClassicMcEliece].

   NTRU:  KEM based on the "N-th degree Truncated polynomial Ring Units"
      (NTRU) lattices.  Variants include Streamlined NTRU Prime
      (sntrup761), which is leveraged for use in SSH [RFC9941].  See
      [NTRU].

7.  Timeline for Transition

   The timeline and driving motivation for transition differ slightly
   between data confidentiality (e.g., encryption) and data
   authentication (e.g., signature) use cases.

   For data confidentiality, one is concerned with the so-called
   "harvest now, decrypt later" (HNDL) attack where a malicious actor
   with adequate resources can launch an attack to store sensitive
   encrypted data today that they hope to decrypt once a CRQC is
   available.  This implies that, every day, sensitive encrypted data is
   susceptible to the attack by not implementing quantum-safe
   strategies, as it corresponds to data possibly being deciphered in
   the future.

   For authentication, it is often the case that signatures have a very
   short lifetime between signing and verifying (such as during a TLS
   handshake), but some authentication use cases do require long
   lifetimes, such as signing firmware or software that will be active
   for decades, signing legal documents, or signing certificates that
   will be embedded into hardware devices such as smart cards.  Even for
   short-lived signature use cases, the infrastructure often relies on
   long-lived root keys, which can be difficult to update or replace on
   in-field devices.

   +------------------------+----------------------------+
   |                        |                            |
   |           y            |             x              |
   +------------------------+----------+-----------------+
   |                                   | <--------------->
   |               z                   |   Security gap
   +-----------------------------------+

                           Figure 1: Mosca Model

   These challenges are illustrated nicely by the so-called Mosca model
   discussed in [Threat-Report].  In Figure 1, "x" denotes the time that
   systems and data need to remain secure, "y" the number of years to
   fully migrate to a PQC infrastructure, and "z" the time until a CRQC
   that can break current cryptography is available.  The model assumes
   either that encrypted data can be intercepted and stored before the
   migration is completed in "y" years, or that signatures will still be
   relied upon for "x" years after their creation.  This data remains
   vulnerable for the complete "x" years of their lifetime; thus, the
   sum "x+y" gives us an estimate of the full timeframe that data
   remains insecure.  The model essentially asks how one is preparing IT
   systems during those "y" years (in other words, how one can minimize
   those "y" years) to minimize the transition phase to a PQC
   infrastructure and hence minimize the risks of data being exposed in
   the future.

   Finally, other factors that could accelerate the introduction of a
   CRQC should not be underestimated, for example, faster-than-expected
   advances in quantum computing and more efficient versions of Shor's
   algorithm requiring fewer qubits.  Innovation often comes in waves,
   so it is to the industry's benefit to remain vigilant and prepare as
   early as possible.  Also, bear in mind that while the industry tracks
   advances from public research institutions such as universities and
   companies that publish their results, there is also a great deal of
   large-budget quantum research being conducted privately by various
   national interests.  Therefore, the true state of quantum computer
   advancement is likely several years ahead of the publicly available
   research at the date this document is published.

   Organizations should also carefully and honestly consider what their
   migration timeline "y" actually is.  If you only think of the time
   between receiving a patch from your technology vendor and rolling
   that patch out, then "y" might seem as short as a few weeks.
   However, this represents the minority of migration cases; more often,
   a PQC migration will involve at least some amount of hardware
   replacement.  For example, performance-sensitive applications will
   need CPUs with PQC hardware acceleration.  Security-sensitive
   applications will need PQC TPMs, Trusted Execution Environments
   (TEEs), secure enclaves, and other cryptographic co-processors.
   Smart card applications will require replacement of the cards and
   readers.  The readers can come in many form factors: tap-for-entry
   door and turnstile readers, PIN pad machines, laptops with built-in
   smart card readers, and many others.

   Included in "y" is not only the deployment time but also the
   preparation time: integration, testing, auditing, and recertification
   of cryptographic environments.  Also consider upstream effects that
   contribute to "y", including lead times for vendors to produce PQC-
   ready products, which may itself include auditing and certification
   delays, time for regulating bodies to adopt PQC policies, time for
   auditors to become familiar with the new requirements, etc.  If you
   measure the full migration time "y" from when your vendors begin
   implementing PQC functionality to when you switch off your last non-
   PQC-capable device, then "y" can be quite long, likely measured in
   years for even most moderately sized organizations.  This long tail
   should not discourage early action.

   Organizations responsible for protecting long-lived sensitive data or
   operating critical infrastructure will need to begin transitioning
   immediately, particularly in scenarios where data is vulnerable to
   HNDL attacks.  Post-quantum and traditional (PQ/T) Section 13 or PQ
   key exchange is relatively self-contained, typically requiring
   changes only to the cryptographic library (e.g., OpenSSL).  In
   contrast, migrating to post-quantum or PQ/T digital signatures
   involves broader ecosystem changes, including updates to
   certificates, certification authorities (CAs), Certificate Management
   Protocols, HSMs, and trust anchors.  Starting early with hybrid key
   exchange deployments allows organizations to gain operational
   experience, while prototyping and planning for PQ/T or PQ digital
   signature integration helps identify ecosystem-wide impacts early.
   This phased approach reduces long-term migration risks and ensures
   readiness for more complex updates.

8.  PQC Categories

   The post-quantum cryptographic schemes standardized by NIST can be
   categorized into three main groups: lattice-based, hash-based, and
   code-based.  Other approaches, such as isogeny-based, multivariate-
   based, and MPC-in-the-Head-based cryptography, are also being
   explored in research and standardization efforts.  In addition, NIST
   issued a call for additional digital signature proposals to expand
   the set of post-quantum signatures under evaluation [AddSig].

8.1.  Lattice-Based Public Key Cryptography

   Lattice-based public key cryptography leverages the simple
   construction of lattices (i.e., a regular collection of points in a
   Euclidean space that are evenly spaced) to create "trapdoor"
   problems.  These problems are efficient to compute if you possess the
   secret information but challenging to compute otherwise.  Examples of
   such problems include the shortest vector, closest vector, short
   integer solution, learning with errors, module learning with errors,
   and learning with rounding problems.  All of these problems feature
   strong proofs for worst-to-average case reduction, effectively
   relating the hardness of the average case to the worst case.

   Lattice-based public keys and signatures are larger than those of
   classical schemes such as RSA or ECC, but typically by less than an
   order of magnitude for public keys (about 6-10x) and by roughly one
   to two orders of magnitude for signatures (about 10-100x) rather than
   by several orders of magnitude, making them the best available
   candidates for general-purpose use, such as replacing the use of RSA
   in PKIX certificates.

   Examples of this class of algorithms include ML-KEM, FN-DSA, ML-DSA,
   and FrodoKEM.

   It is noteworthy that lattice-based encryption schemes require a
   rounding step during decryption, which has a non-zero probability of
   "rounding the wrong way" and leading to a decryption failure, meaning
   that valid encryptions are decrypted incorrectly.  However, the
   parameters of NIST PQC candidates are carefully chosen so that the
   probability of such a failure is cryptographically negligible, far
   lower than the probability of random transmission errors and
   implementation bugs.  In practical terms, these rare decryption
   failures can be treated the same way as any fatal transport error:
   Both sides simply perform a fresh KEM operation, generating a new
   ciphertext and shared secret.

   In cryptanalysis, an oracle refers to a system that an attacker can
   query to learn whether decryption succeeded or failed.  If such an
   oracle exists, an attacker could significantly reduce the security of
   lattice-based schemes that have a relatively high failure rate.
   However, for most of the NIST PQC proposals, the number of required
   oracle queries to force a decryption failure is above practical
   limits, as shown in [LattFail1].  More recent works have improved
   upon the results in [LattFail1], showing that the cost of searching
   for additional failing ciphertexts after one or more have already
   been found can be sped up dramatically [LattFail2].  Nevertheless, at
   the time this document is published, the PQC candidates by NIST are
   considered secure under these attacks, and constant monitoring as
   cryptanalysis research is ongoing.

8.2.  Hash-Based Public Key Cryptography

   Hash-based Public Key Cryptography (Hash-based PKC) has been around
   since the 1970s, when it was developed by Lamport and Merkle.  It is
   used to create digital signature algorithms, and its security is
   based on the security of the underlying cryptographic hash function.
   Many variants of hash-based signatures (HBSs) have been developed
   since the 1970s, including the recent XMSS [RFC8391], HSS/LMS
   [RFC8554], or BPQS [BPQS] schemes.  Unlike many other digital
   signature techniques, most hash-based signature schemes are stateful,
   which means that signing necessitates the update and careful tracking
   of the state of the secret key.  Producing multiple signatures using
   the same secret key state results in loss of security and may
   ultimately enable signature forgery attacks against that key.

   Stateful hash-based signatures with long service lifetimes require
   additional operational complexity compared to other signature types.
   For example, consider a 20-year root key; there is an expectation
   that 20 years is longer than the expected lifetime of the hardware
   that key is stored on, so the key will need to be migrated to new
   hardware at some point.  Disaster-recovery scenarios where the
   primary node fails without warning can be similarly tricky.  This
   requires careful operational and compliance consideration to ensure
   that no private key state can be reused across the migration or
   disaster recovery event.  One approach for avoiding these issues is
   to only use stateful HBSs for short-term use cases that do not
   require horizontal scaling, for example, signing a batch of firmware
   images and then retiring the signing key.

   The SLH-DSA algorithm, which was standardized by NIST, leverages the
   HORST (Hash to Obtain Random Subset with Trees) technique and remains
   the only standardized hash based signature scheme that is stateless,
   thus avoiding the complexities associated with state management.
   SLH-DSA is an advancement on SPHINCS that reduces the signature sizes
   in SPHINCS and makes it more compact.

8.3.  Code-Based Public Key Cryptography

   This area of cryptography started in the 1970s and 1980s and was
   based on the seminal work of McEliece and Niederreiter, which focuses
   on the study of cryptosystems based on error-correcting codes.  Some
   popular error-correcting codes include Goppa codes (used in McEliece
   cryptosystems), encoding and decoding syndrome codes used in HQC, or
   quasi-cyclic moderate density parity check (QC-MDPC) codes.

   Examples include all the unbroken NIST Round 4 finalists: Classic
   McEliece, HQC (selected by NIST for standardization), and Bit
   Flipping Key Encapsulation (BIKE) [BIKE].

9.  KEMs

   A Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) is a cryptographic technique used
   for securely exchanging symmetric key material between two parties
   over an insecure channel.  It is commonly used in hybrid encryption
   schemes where a combination of asymmetric (public key) and symmetric
   encryption is employed.  The encapsulation operation of a KEM results
   in a fixed-length symmetric key that can be used with a symmetric
   algorithm, typically a block cipher, in one of two different ways:

   *  To derive a data encryption key (DEK) to encrypt the data

   *  To derive a key encryption key (KEK) used to wrap a DEK

   These techniques are often referred to as the Hybrid Public Key
   Encryption (HPKE) [RFC9180] mechanism.

   The term "encapsulation" is chosen intentionally to indicate that KEM
   algorithms behave differently at the API level from the key agreement
   or key encipherment and key transport mechanisms that are in use
   today.  Key agreement schemes imply that both parties contribute a
   public-private key pair to the exchange, while key encipherment and
   key transport schemes imply that the symmetric key material is chosen
   by one party and "encrypted" or "wrapped" for the other party.  KEMs,
   on the other hand, behave according to the following API primitives
   [PQCAPI]:

   *  def kemKeyGen() -> (pk, sk)

   *  def kemEncaps(pk) -> (ss, ct)

   *  def kemDecaps(ct, sk) -> ss

   where pk is the public key, sk is the secret key, ct is the
   ciphertext representing an encapsulated key, and ss is the shared
   secret.  The following figure illustrates a sample flow of a KEM-
   based key exchange:

                         +---------+ +---------+
                         | Client  | | Server  |
                         +---------+ +---------+
     +----------------------+ |           |
     | pk, sk = kemKeyGen() |-|           |
     +----------------------+ |           |
                              |           |
                              | pk        |
                              |---------->|
                              |           | +-----------------------+
                              |           |-| ss, ct = kemEncaps(pk)|
                              |           | +-----------------------+
                              |           |
                              |       ct  |
                              |<----------|
   +------------------------+ |           |
   | ss = kemDecaps(ct, sk) |-|           |
   +------------------------+ |           |
                              |           |

                      Figure 2: KEM-Based Key Exchange

9.1.  Authenticated Key Exchange

   Authenticated Key Exchange (AKE) with KEMs where both parties
   contribute a KEM public key to the overall session key is interactive
   as described in Section 9.4 of [RFC9528].  However, a single-sided
   KEM, such as when one peer has a KEM key in a certificate and the
   other peer wants to encrypt for it (as in S/MIME or OpenPGP email),
   can be achieved using non-interactive HPKE [RFC9180].  The following
   figure illustrates the DH Key exchange:

                         +---------+ +---------+
                         | Client  | | Server  |
                         +---------+ +---------+
     +-----------------------+ |           |
     | Long-term client key: | |           |
     |         sk1, pk1      |-|           |
     +-----------------------+ |           |
                               |           |
                               | pk1       |
                               |---------->|
                               |           | +------------------------+
                               |           |-| Long-term server key:  |
                               |           | |         sk2, pk2       |
                               |           | | ss = KeyEx(pk1, sk2)   |
                               |           | +------------------------+
                               |           |
                               |        pk2|
                               |<----------|
   +-------------------------+ |           |
   | ss = KeyEx(pk2, sk1)    | |           |
   |  encryptContent(ss)     |-|           |
   +-------------------------+ |           |
                               | encrypted |
                               |   content |
                               |---------->|
                               |           | +------------------------+
                               |           | | decryptContent(ss)     |
                               |           | +------------------------+

                           Figure 3: DH-Based AKE

   In the sample flow above, it is important to note that the shared
   secret ss is derived using key material from both the client and the
   server, which classifies it as an AKE.  There is another property of
   a key exchange, called Non-Interactive Key Exchange (NIKE), that
   refers to whether the sender can compute the shared secret ss and
   encrypt content without requiring active interaction (an exchange of
   network messages) with the recipient.  Figure 3 shows a DH key
   exchange, which is an AKE since both parties are using long-term keys
   that can have established trust (for example, via certificates), but
   it is not a NIKE since the client needs to wait for the network
   interaction to receive the receiver's public key pk2 before it can
   compute the shared secret ss and begin content encryption.  However,
   a DH key exchange can be an AKE and a NIKE at the same time if the
   receiver's public key is known to the sender in advance (see
   Figure 4), and many Internet protocols rely on this property of DH-
   based key exchanges.

                         +---------+ +---------+
                         | Client  | | Server  |
                         +---------+ +---------+
     +-----------------------+ |           |
     | Long-term client key: | |           |
     |         sk1, pk1      |-|           |
     | Long-term server key: | |           |
     |         pk2           | |           |
     | ss = KeyEx(pk2, sk1)  | |           |
     |  encryptContent(ss)   |-|           |
     +-----------------------+ |           |
                               |           |
                               | pk1,      |
                               | encrypted |
                               |   content |
                               |---------->|
                               |           | +------------------------+
                               |           |-| Long-term server key:  |
                               |           | |         sk2, pk2       |
                               |           | | ss = KeyEx(pk1, sk2)   |
                               |           | |  decryptContent(ss)    |
                               |           | +------------------------+

                Figure 4: Simultaneous DH-Based AKE and NIKE

   The complication with KEMs is that a KEM Encaps() is non-
   deterministic; it involves randomness chosen by the sender of that
   message.  Therefore, in order to perform an AKE, the client must wait
   for the server to generate the needed randomness and perform Encaps()
   against the client key, which necessarily requires a network round-
   trip.  Therefore, a KEM-based protocol can either be an AKE or a
   NIKE, but it cannot be both at the same time.  Consequently, certain
   Internet protocols will necessitate a redesign to accommodate this
   distinction, either by introducing extra network round trips or by
   making trade-offs in security properties.

                         +---------+ +---------+
                         | Client  | | Server  |
                         +---------+ +---------+
   +------------------------+ |           |
   | pk1, sk1 = kemKeyGen() |-|           |
   +------------------------+ |           |
                              |           |
                              |pk1        |
                              |---------->|
                              |           | +--------------------------+
                              |           |-| ss1, ct1 = kemEncaps(pk1)|
                              |           | | pk2, sk2 = kemKeyGen()   |
                              |           | +--------------------------+
                              |           |
                              |    ct1,pk2|
                              |<----------|
 +--------------------------+ |           |
 | ss1 = kemDecaps(ct1, sk1)| |           |
 | ss2, ct2 = kemEncaps(pk2)|-|           |
 | ss = Combiner(ss1, ss2)  | |           |
 +--------------------------+ |           |
                              |           |
                              |ct2        |
                              |---------->|
                              |           | +--------------------------+
                              |           |-| ss2 = kemDecaps(ct2, sk2)|
                              |           | | ss = Combiner(ss1, ss2)  |
                              |           | +--------------------------+

                        Figure 5: KEM-Based AKE

   In the figure above, Combiner(ss1, ss2), often referred to as a KEM
   combiner, is a cryptographic construction that takes in two shared
   secrets and returns a single combined shared secret.  The simplest
   combiner is concatenation ss1 || ss2, but combiners can vary in
   complexity depending on the cryptographic properties required.  For
   example, if the combination should preserve IND-CCA2 (see
   Section 9.2.1) of either input, even if the other is chosen
   maliciously, then a more complex construct is required.  Another
   consideration for combiner design is the so-called "binding
   properties" introduced in [KEEPINGUP], which may require the
   ciphertexts and recipient public keys to be included in the combiner.
   KEM combiner security analysis becomes more complicated in hybrid
   settings where the two KEMs represent different algorithms, for
   example, where one is ML-KEM and the other is ECDH.  For a more
   thorough discussion of KEM combiners, see [KEEPINGUP],
   [KEM-COMBINER], and [PQ-KEM].

9.2.  Security Properties of KEMs

   The security properties described in this section (IND-CCA2 and
   binding) are not an exhaustive list of all possible KEM security
   considerations.  They were selected because they are fundamental to
   evaluating KEM suitability in protocol design and are commonly
   discussed in current PQC work.

9.2.1.  IND-CCA2

   IND-CCA2 (INDistinguishability under adaptive Chosen-Ciphertext
   Attack) is an advanced security notion for encryption schemes.  It
   ensures the confidentiality of the plaintext and resistance against
   chosen-ciphertext attacks.  An appropriate definition of IND-CCA2
   security for KEMs can be found in [CS01] and [BHK09].  ML-KEM
   [ML-KEM] and Classic McEliece provide IND-CCA2 security.

   Understanding IND-CCA2 security is essential for individuals involved
   in designing or implementing cryptographic systems and protocols in
   order to evaluate the strength of the algorithm, assess its
   suitability for specific use cases, and ensure that data
   confidentiality and security requirements are met.  Understanding
   IND-CCA2 security is generally not necessary for developers migrating
   to using an IETF-vetted KEM within a given protocol or flow.  IND-
   CCA2 is a widely accepted security notion for public key encryption
   mechanisms, making it suitable for a broad range of applications.
   When an IETF specification defines a new KEM, its security
   considerations should fully describe the relevant cryptographic
   properties, including IND-CCA2.

9.2.2.  Binding

   KEMs also have an orthogonal set of properties to consider when
   designing protocols around them: binding [KEEPINGUP].  This can be
   "ciphertext binding", "public key binding", "context binding", or any
   other property that is important to not be substituted between KEM
   invocations.  In general, a KEM is considered to bind a certain value
   if substitution of that value by an attacker will necessarily result
   in a different shared secret being derived.  As an example, if an
   attacker can construct two different ciphertexts that will
   decapsulate to the same shared secret, can construct a ciphertext
   that will decapsulate to the same shared secret under two different
   public keys, or can substitute whole KEM exchanges from one session
   into another, then the construction is not ciphertext binding, public
   key binding, or context binding, respectively.  Similarly, protocol
   designers may wish to bind protocol state information such as a
   transaction ID or nonce so that attempts to replay ciphertexts from
   one session inside a different session will be blocked at the
   cryptographic level because the server derives a different shared
   secret and is thus is unable to decrypt the content.

   The solution to binding is generally achieved at the protocol design
   level: It is recommended to avoid using the KEM output shared secret
   directly without integrating it into an appropriate protocol.  While
   KEM algorithms provide key secrecy, they do not inherently ensure
   source authenticity, protect against replay attacks, or guarantee
   freshness.  These security properties should be addressed by
   incorporating the KEM into a protocol that has been analyzed for such
   protections.  Even though modern KEMs such as ML-KEM produce full-
   entropy shared secrets, it is still advisable for binding reasons to
   pass the shared secret through a key derivation function (KDF) and
   also include all values that you wish to bind; finally, you will have
   a shared secret that is safe to use at the protocol level.

9.3.  HPKE

   Modern cryptography has long used the notion of "hybrid encryption"
   where an asymmetric algorithm is used to establish a key and then a
   symmetric algorithm is used for bulk content encryption.  The
   previous sections explained important security properties of KEMs,
   such as IND-CCA2 security and binding, and emphasized that these
   properties must be supported by proper protocol design.  One widely
   deployed scheme that achieves this is Hybrid Public Key Encryption
   (HPKE) [RFC9180].

   HPKE [RFC9180] works with a combination of KEMs, KDFs, and
   Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) schemes.  HPKE
   includes three authenticated variants, including one that
   authenticates possession of a pre-shared key and two optional ones
   that authenticate possession of a KEM private key.  HPKE can be
   extended to support hybrid post-quantum KEM [PQ-HPKE].  ML-KEM does
   not support the static-ephemeral key exchange that allows HPKE that
   is based on DH-based KEMs and its optional authenticated modes as
   discussed in Section 1.5 of [X-WING].

10.  PQC Signatures

   Any digital signature scheme that provides a construction defining
   security under a post-quantum setting falls under this category of
   PQC signatures.

10.1.  Security Properties of PQC Signatures

10.1.1.  EUF-CMA and SUF-CMA

   EUF-CMA (existential unforgeability under chosen message attack)
   [GMR88] is a security notion for digital signature schemes.  It
   guarantees that an adversary, even with access to a signing oracle,
   cannot forge a valid signature for an arbitrary message.  EUF-CMA
   provides strong protection against forgery attacks, ensuring the
   integrity and authenticity of digital signatures by preventing
   unauthorized modifications or fraudulent signatures.  ML-DSA, FN-DSA,
   and SLH-DSA provide EUF-CMA security.

   SUF-CMA (strong unforgeability under chosen message attack) builds
   upon EUF-CMA by requiring that an adversary cannot produce a
   different valid signature for a message that has already been signed
   by the signing oracle.  Like EUF-CMA, SUF-CMA provides robust
   assurances for digital signature schemes, further enhancing their
   security posture.  ML-DSA, FN-DSA, and SLH-DSA also achieve SUF-CMA
   security.

   Understanding EUF-CMA and SUF-CMA security is essential for designing
   or implementing cryptographic systems in order to ensure the
   security, reliability, and robustness of digital signature schemes.
   These notions allow for informed decision making, vulnerability
   analysis, compliance with standards, and designing systems that
   provide strong protection against forgery attacks.  For developers
   migrating to an IETF-vetted PQC signature scheme within a given
   protocol or flow, a deep understanding of EUF-CMA and SUF-CMA
   security may not be necessary, as the schemes vetted by IETF adhere
   to these stringent security standards.

   EUF-CMA and SUF-CMA are considered strong security benchmarks for
   public key signature algorithms, making them suitable for most
   applications.  Authors of IETF specifications should include all
   security concerns in the "Security Considerations" section of the
   relevant RFC and should not assume that implementers are experts in
   cryptographic theory.

10.2.  Details of FN-DSA, ML-DSA, and SLH-DSA

   ML-DSA [ML-DSA] is a digital signature algorithm based on the
   hardness of lattice problems over module lattices (i.e., the Module
   Learning with Errors (MLWE) problem).  The design of the algorithm is
   based on the "Fiat-Shamir with Aborts" [Lyu09] framework introduced
   by Lyubashevsky that leverages rejection sampling to render lattice-
   based Fiat-Shamir (FS) schemes compact and secure.  ML-DSA uses
   uniformly distributed random number sampling over small integers to
   compute coefficients in error vectors, which makes the scheme easier
   to implement compared to FN-DSA [FN-DSA], which uses Gaussian-
   distributed numbers, necessitating the need to use floating-point
   arithmetic during signature generation.

   ML-DSA offers both deterministic and randomized signing and is
   instantiated with three parameter sets providing different security
   levels.  Security properties of ML-DSA are discussed in Section 9 of
   [RFC9881].

   FN-DSA [FN-DSA] is based on the GPV hash-and-sign lattice-based
   signature framework introduced by Gentry, Peikert, and
   Vaikuntanathan, which is a framework that requires a certain class of
   lattices and a trapdoor sampler technique.

   The main design principle of FN-DSA is compactness, i.e., it was
   designed in a way that achieves minimal total memory bandwidth
   requirement (the sum of the signature size plus the public key size).
   This is possible due to the compactness of NTRU lattices.  FN-DSA
   also offers very efficient signing and verification procedures.  The
   main potential downsides of FN-DSA refer to the non-triviality of its
   algorithms and the need for floating-point arithmetic support in
   order to support Gaussian-distributed random number sampling where
   the other lattice schemes use the less efficient but easier to
   support uniformly distributed random number sampling.

   Implementers of FN-DSA need to be aware that FN-DSA signing is highly
   susceptible to side-channel attacks unless constant-time 64-bit
   floating-point operations are used.  This requirement is extremely
   platform-dependent, as noted in NIST's report [NIST].

   The performance characteristics of ML-DSA and FN-DSA may differ based
   on the specific implementation and hardware platform.  Generally, ML-
   DSA is known for its relatively fast signature generation, while FN-
   DSA can provide more efficient signature verification.  The choice
   may depend on whether the application requires more frequent
   signature generation or signature verification (see [LIBOQS]).  For
   further clarity on the sizes and security levels, please refer to the
   tables in Sections 11 and 12.

   SLH-DSA [SLH-DSA] utilizes the concept of stateless hash-based
   signatures, where each signature is unique and unrelated to any
   previous signature (as discussed in Section 8.2).  This property
   eliminates the need for maintaining state information during the
   signing process.  SLH-DSA was designed to sign up to 2^64 messages
   under a given key pair, and it offers three security levels.  The
   parameters for each of the security levels were chosen to provide 128
   bits of security, 192 bits of security, and 256 bits of security.
   SLH-DSA offers smaller public key sizes, larger signature sizes,
   slower signature generation, and slower verification when compared to
   ML-DSA and FN-DSA.  SLH-DSA does not introduce a new hardness
   assumption beyond those inherent to the underlying hash functions.
   It builds upon established foundations in cryptography, making it a
   reliable and robust digital signature scheme for a post-quantum
   world.

   All of these algorithms (ML-DSA, FN-DSA, and SLH-DSA) include two
   signature modes: pure mode, where the entire content is signed
   directly, and pre-hash mode, where a digest of the content is signed.

10.3.  Details of XMSS and LMS

   The eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme (XMSS) [RFC8391] and
   Hierarchical Signature Scheme (HSS) / Leighton-Micali Signature (LMS)
   [RFC8554] are stateful hash-based signature schemes, where the secret
   key state changes over time.  In both schemes, reusing a secret key
   state compromises cryptographic security guarantees.

   XMSS and LMS can be used for signing a potentially large but fixed
   number of messages, and the number of signing operations depends upon
   the size of the tree.  XMSS and LMS provide cryptographic digital
   signatures without relying on the conjectured hardness of
   mathematical problems, instead leveraging the properties of
   cryptographic hash functions.  Multi-tree XMSS and LMS (i.e., XMSS-MT
   and HSS, respectively) use a hyper-tree-based hierarchical approach
   with a Merkle tree at each level of the hierarchy.  [RFC8391]
   describes both single-tree and multi-tree variants of XMSS, while
   [RFC8554] describes the Leighton-Micali One-Time Signature (LM-OTS)
   system as well as the LMS and HSS N-time signature systems.
   Comparison of XMSS and LMS is discussed in Section 10 of [RFC8554].

   The number of tree layers in multi-tree XMSS and HSS provides a
   trade-off between signature size on the one side and key generation
   and signing speed on the other side.  Increasing the number of layers
   reduces key generation time exponentially and signing time linearly
   at the cost of increasing the signature size linearly.  HSS allows
   for customization of each subtree, whereas XMSS-MT does not, electing
   instead to use the same structure for each subtree.

   Due to the complexities described above, XMSS and LMS are not
   suitable replacements for traditional signature schemes like RSA or
   ECDSA.  Applications that expect a long lifetime of a signature, like
   firmware update or secure boot, are typical use cases where those
   schemes can be successfully applied.

10.3.1.  LMS Key and Signature Sizes

   The LMS scheme is characterized by four distinct parameter sets: the
   underlying hash function (SHA2-256 or SHAKE-256), the length of the
   digest (24 or 32 bytes), the LMS tree height parameter that controls
   a maximal number of signatures that the private key can produce, and
   the width of the Winternitz coefficients (see [RFC8554], Section 4.1)
   that can be used to trade-off signing time for signature size.
   Parameters can be mixed, providing 80 possible parameterizations of
   the scheme.

   The public (PK) and private (SK) key size depends on the length of
   the digest (M).  The signature size depends on the digest, the
   Winternitz parameter (W), the LMS tree height (H), and the length of
   the digest.  The table below provides key and signature sizes for
   parameterization with the digest size M=32 of the scheme.

            +====+====+===+======+======+======+======+======+
            | PK | SK | W | H=5  | H=10 | H=15 | H=20 | H=25 |
            +====+====+===+======+======+======+======+======+
            | 56 | 52 | 1 | 8684 | 8844 | 9004 | 9164 | 9324 |
            +----+----+---+------+------+------+------+------+
            | 56 | 52 | 2 | 4460 | 4620 | 4780 | 4940 | 5100 |
            +----+----+---+------+------+------+------+------+
            | 56 | 52 | 4 | 2348 | 2508 | 2668 | 2828 | 2988 |
            +----+----+---+------+------+------+------+------+
            | 56 | 52 | 8 | 1292 | 1452 | 1612 | 1772 | 1932 |
            +----+----+---+------+------+------+------+------+

                                 Table 1

10.4.  Hash-then-Sign

   Within the hash-then-sign paradigm, the message is hashed before
   signing it.  By pre-hashing, the onus of resistance to existential
   forgeries becomes heavily reliant on the collision-resistance of the
   hash function in use.  The hash-then-sign paradigm has the ability to
   improve application performance by reducing the size of signed
   messages that need to be transmitted between application and
   cryptographic module and making the signature size predictable and
   manageable.  As a corollary, hashing remains mandatory even for short
   messages and assigns a further computational requirement onto the
   verifier.  This makes the performance of hash-then-sign schemes more
   consistent, but not necessarily more efficient.

   Using a hash function to produce a fixed-size digest of a message
   ensures that the signature is compatible with a wide range of systems
   and protocols, regardless of the specific message size or format.
   Crucially for hardware security modules, hash-then-sign also
   significantly reduces the amount of data that needs to be transmitted
   and processed by a Hardware Security Module (HSM).  Consider
   scenarios such as a networked HSM located in a different data center
   from the calling application or a smart card connected over a USB
   interface.  In these cases, streaming a message that is megabytes or
   gigabytes long can result in notable network latency, on-device
   signing delays, or even depletion of available on-device memory.

   Note that the vast majority of Internet protocols that sign large
   messages already perform some form of content hashing at the protocol
   level, so this tends to be more of a concern with proprietary
   cryptographic protocols and protocols from non-IETF standards bodies.
   Protocols like TLS 1.3 and DNSSEC use the hash-then-sign paradigm.
   In TLS 1.3 [RFC8446] CertificateVerify messages, the content that is
   covered under the signature includes the transcript hash output
   (Section 4.4.1 of [RFC8446]) while DNSSEC [RFC4034] uses it to
   provide origin authentication and integrity assurance services for
   DNS data.  Similarly, the Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)
   [RFC5652] includes a mandatory message digest step before invoking
   the signature algorithm.

   In the case of ML-DSA, it internally incorporates the necessary hash
   operations as part of its signing algorithm.  ML-DSA directly takes
   the original message, applies a hash function internally, and then
   uses the resulting hash value for the signature generation process.
   In the case of SLH-DSA, it internally performs randomized message
   compression using a keyed hash function that can process arbitrary
   length messages.  In the case of FN-DSA, the SHAKE-256 hash function
   is used as part of the signature process to derive a digest of the
   message being signed.

   Therefore, ML-DSA, FN-DSA, and SLH-DSA offer enhanced security over
   the traditional hash-then-sign paradigm because, by incorporating
   dynamic key material into the message digest, a pre-computed hash
   collision on the message to be signed no longer yields a signature
   forgery.  Applications requiring the performance and bandwidth
   benefits of hash-then-sign may still pre-hash at the protocol level
   prior to invoking ML-DSA, FN-DSA, or SLH-DSA, but protocol designers
   should be aware that doing so reintroduces the weakness that hash
   collisions directly yield signature forgeries.  Signing the full un-
   digested message is recommended where applications can tolerate it.

11.  NIST Recommendations for Security and Performance Trade-offs

   This information is a reprint of information provided in the NIST PQC
   project [NIST] as of the time this document is published.  Table 2
   denotes the five security levels provided by NIST for PQC algorithms.
   Neither NIST nor the IETF makes any specific recommendations about
   which security level to use.  In general, protocols will include
   algorithm choices at multiple levels so that users can choose the
   level appropriate to their policies and data classification, similar
   to how organizations today choose which size of RSA key to use.  The
   security levels are defined as requiring computational resources
   comparable to or greater than an attack on AES (128, 192, and 256)
   and SHA2/SHA3 algorithms, i.e., exhaustive key recovery for AES and
   optimal collision search for SHA2/SHA3.

     +=============+=====================+===========================+
     | PQ Security | AES/SHA(2/3)        | PQC Algorithm             |
     | Level       | hardness            |                           |
     +=============+=====================+===========================+
     | 1           | AES-128 (exhaustive | ML-KEM-512, FN-DSA-512,   |
     |             | key recovery)       | SLH-DSA-SHA2/SHAKE-128f/s |
     +-------------+---------------------+---------------------------+
     | 2           | SHA-256/SHA3-256    | ML-DSA-44                 |
     |             | (collision search)  |                           |
     +-------------+---------------------+---------------------------+
     | 3           | AES-192 (exhaustive | ML-KEM-768, ML-DSA-65,    |
     |             | key recovery)       | SLH-DSA-SHA2/SHAKE-192f/s |
     +-------------+---------------------+---------------------------+
     | 4           | SHA-384/SHA3-384    | No algorithm tested at    |
     |             | (collision search)  | this level                |
     +-------------+---------------------+---------------------------+
     | 5           | AES-256 (exhaustive | ML-KEM-1024, FN-DSA-1024, |
     |             | key recovery)       | ML-DSA-87, SLH-DSA-SHA2/  |
     |             |                     | SHAKE-256f/s              |
     +-------------+---------------------+---------------------------+

                                  Table 2

   The SLH-DSA-x-yf/s "f/s" in the above table denotes whether SLH-DSA
   is using SHAKE or SHA-2 as an underlying hash function "x" and
   whether it is the fast (f) or small (s) version for "y" bit AES
   security level.  Refer to [RFC9814] for further details on SLH-DSA
   algorithms.

   The following table compares the signature sizes for different SLH-
   DSA algorithm categories at equivalent security levels using the
   "simple" version.  The categories include "f" for fast signature
   generation and "s" for smaller signature size and faster
   verification, although with slower signature generation.  Both
   SHA-256 and SHAKE-256 parameterizations produce the same signature
   sizes and are therefore included together in the table.

   +==========+===========================+========+=======+===========+
   | PQ       | Algorithm                 | Public |Private| Signature |
   | Security |                           | key    |key    | size (in  |
   | Level    |                           | size   |size   | bytes)    |
   |          |                           | (in    |(in    |           |
   |          |                           | bytes) |bytes) |           |
   +==========+===========================+========+=======+===========+
   | 1        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-128f | 32     |64     | 17088     |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+
   | 1        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-128s | 32     |64     | 7856      |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+
   | 3        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-192f | 48     |96     | 35664     |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+
   | 3        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-192s | 48     |96     | 16224     |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+
   | 5        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-256f | 64     |128    | 49856     |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+
   | 5        | SLH-DSA-{SHA2,SHAKE}-256s | 64     |128    | 29792     |
   +----------+---------------------------+--------+-------+-----------+

                                  Table 3

   The following table illustrates the impact of performance on
   different security levels in terms of private key sizes, public key
   sizes, and ciphertext/signature sizes.

   +==========+=============+============+============+================+
   | PQ       | Algorithm   | Public key | Private    | Ciphertext/    |
   | Security |             | size (in   | key size   | signature      |
   | Level    |             | bytes)     | (in bytes) | size (in       |
   |          |             |            |            | bytes)         |
   +==========+=============+============+============+================+
   | 1        | ML-KEM-512  | 800        | 1632       | 768            |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 1        | FN-DSA-512  | 897        | 1281       | 666            |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 2        | ML-DSA-44   | 1312       | 2560       | 2420           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 3        | ML-KEM-768  | 1184       | 2400       | 1088           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 3        | ML-DSA-65   | 1952       | 4032       | 3309           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 5        | FN-DSA-1024 | 1793       | 2305       | 1280           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 5        | ML-KEM-1024 | 1568       | 3168       | 1588           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+
   | 5        | ML-DSA-87   | 2592       | 4896       | 4627           |
   +----------+-------------+------------+------------+----------------+

                                  Table 4

12.  Comparing PQC KEMs/Signatures against Traditional KEMs, Key
     Exchanges, and Signatures

   This section provides two tables for comparison of different KEMs and
   signatures, respectively, in the traditional and post-quantum
   scenarios.  These tables focus on the secret key sizes, public key
   sizes, and ciphertext/signature sizes for the PQC algorithms and
   their traditional counterparts of similar security levels.

   The first table compares traditional and PQC KEMs in terms of
   security, public and private key sizes, and ciphertext sizes.

   +=============+=====================+========+=========+============+
   | PQ Security | Algorithm           | Public | Private | Ciphertext |
   | Level       |                     | key    | key     | size (in   |
   |             |                     | size   | size    | bytes)     |
   |             |                     | (in    | (in     |            |
   |             |                     | bytes) | bytes)  |            |
   +=============+=====================+========+=========+============+
   | Traditional | P256_HKDF_SHA-256   | 65     | 32      | 65         |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+
   | Traditional | P521_HKDF_SHA-512   | 133    | 66      | 133        |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+
   | Traditional | X25519_HKDF_SHA-256 | 32     | 32      | 32         |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+
   | 1           | ML-KEM-512          | 800    | 1632    | 768        |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+
   | 3           | ML-KEM-768          | 1184   | 2400    | 1088       |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+
   | 5           | ML-KEM-1024         | 1568   | 3168    | 1568       |
   +-------------+---------------------+--------+---------+------------+

                                  Table 5

   The next table compares traditional and PQC signature schemes in
   terms of security, public, private key sizes, and signature sizes.

    +=============+=============+============+============+===========+
    | PQ Security | Algorithm   | Public key | Private    | Signature |
    | Level       |             | size (in   | key size   | size (in  |
    |             |             | bytes)     | (in bytes) | bytes)    |
    +=============+=============+============+============+===========+
    | Traditional | RSA2048     | 256        | 256        | 256       |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | Traditional | ECDSA-P256  | 64         | 32         | 64        |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | 1           | FN-DSA-512  | 897        | 1281       | 666       |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | 2           | ML-DSA-44   | 1312       | 2560       | 2420      |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | 3           | ML-DSA-65   | 1952       | 4032       | 3309      |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | 5           | FN-DSA-1024 | 1793       | 2305       | 1280      |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+
    | 5           | ML-DSA-87   | 2592       | 4896       | 4627      |
    +-------------+-------------+------------+------------+-----------+

                                  Table 6

   As is clear from the above table, PQC KEMs and signature schemes
   typically have significantly larger keys and ciphertexts/signatures
   than their traditional counterparts.  These increased key and
   signatures sizes could introduce problems in protocols.  As an
   example, the Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2) uses
   UDP as the transport protocol for its messages.  One challenge with
   integrating a PQC KEM into IKEv2 is that IKE fragmentation cannot be
   utilized in the initial IKE_SA_INIT exchange.  To address this issue,
   [RFC9242] introduces a solution by defining a new exchange called the
   "Intermediate Exchange", which can be fragmented using the IKE
   fragmentation mechanism.  [RFC9370] then uses this Intermediate
   Exchange to carry out the PQC key exchange after the initial IKEv2
   exchange and before the IKE_AUTH exchange.  Another example from
   Section 6.3.3 of [SP-1800-38C] shows that increased key and signature
   sizes cause protocol key exchange messages to span more network
   packets, which results in a higher total loss probability per packet.
   In lossy network conditions, this may increase the latency of the key
   exchange.

13.  Post-Quantum and Traditional (PQ/T) Hybrid Schemes

   The migration to PQC is unique in the history of modern digital
   cryptography in that neither the traditional algorithms nor the post-
   quantum algorithms are fully trusted to protect data for the required
   lifetimes.  The traditional algorithms, such as RSA and ECDH, will
   fall to quantum cryptanalysis, while the post-quantum algorithms face
   uncertainty about the underlying mathematics, compliance issues,
   unknown vulnerabilities, and hardware and software implementations
   that have not had sufficient maturing time to rule out traditional
   cryptanalytic attacks and implementation bugs.

   During the transition from traditional to post-quantum algorithms,
   there may be a desire or a requirement for protocols that use both
   algorithm types.  [RFC9794] defines the terminology for PQ/T hybrid
   schemes.

13.1.  PQ/T Hybrid Confidentiality

   The PQ/T Hybrid Confidentiality property can be used to mitigate both
   "harvest now, decrypt now" and HNDL attacks described in Section 7.
   If the PQ portion were to have a flaw, the traditional (T) algorithm,
   which is secure against today's attackers, prevents immediate
   decryption ("harvest now, decrypt now").  If the T algorithm is
   broken in the future by CRQCs, the PQ portion, assuming it remains
   secure, prevents later decryption (i.e., HNDL).  A hybrid
   construction therefore provides confidentiality as long as at least
   one component remains secure.  Two types of hybrid key agreement
   schemes are discussed below.

   Concatenated hybrid key agreement scheme:  The final shared secret
      that will be used as an input of the key derivation function is
      the result of the concatenation of the secrets established with
      each key agreement scheme.  For example, in [TLS-HYB-KEY-EXCH],
      the client uses the TLS supported groups extension to advertise
      support for a PQ/T hybrid scheme, and the server can select this
      group if it supports the scheme.  The hybrid-aware client and
      server establish a hybrid secret by concatenating the two shared
      secrets, which is used as the shared secret in the existing TLS
      1.3 key schedule.

   Cascaded hybrid key agreement scheme:  The final shared secret is
      computed by applying as many iterations of the key derivation
      function as the number of key agreement schemes composing the
      hybrid key agreement scheme.  For example, [RFC9370] extends IKEv2
      to allow one or more PQC algorithms in addition to the traditional
      algorithm to derive the final IKE Security Association (SA) keys
      using the cascade method as explained in Section 2.2.2 of
      [RFC9370].

   Various instantiations of these two types of hybrid key agreement
   schemes have been explored.  One must be careful when selecting which
   hybrid scheme to use.  The chosen scheme for protocols like TLS 1.3
   [TLS-HYB-KEY-EXCH] has IND-CCA2 robustness.  That is, IND-CCA2
   security is guaranteed for the scheme as long as at least one of the
   component algorithms is IND-CCA2 secure.

13.2.  PQ/T Hybrid Authentication

   The PQ/T hybrid authentication property provides resilience against
   catastrophic breaks or unforeseen vulnerabilities in PQC algorithms,
   allowing systems additional time to stabilize before migrating fully
   to pure PQ deployments.

   This property ensures authentication using a PQ/T hybrid scheme as
   long as at least one component algorithm remains secure.  For
   example, a PQ/T hybrid certificate [ML-DSA-X.509] can be employed to
   facilitate a PQ/T hybrid authentication protocol.  However, a PQ/T
   hybrid authentication protocol does not need to use a PQ/T hybrid
   certificate; separate certificates could be used for individual
   component algorithms [RFC9763].  When separate certificates are used,
   it may be possible for attackers to take them apart or put them
   together in unexpected ways, including enabling cross-protocol
   attacks.  The exact risks this presents are highly dependent on the
   protocol and use case, so a full security analysis is needed.  Best
   practices for ensuring that pairs of certificates are only used as
   intended are discussed in more detail in Sections 13.3.2 and 13.3.3
   of this document.

   The frequency and duration of system upgrades and the time when CRQCs
   will become widely available need to be weighed to determine whether
   and when to support the PQ/T Hybrid Authentication property.

13.3.  Hybrid Cryptographic Algorithm Combinations: Considerations and
       Approaches

13.3.1.  Hybrid Cryptographic Combinations

   It is also possible to use more than two algorithms together in a
   hybrid scheme, with various methods for combining them.  For post-
   quantum transition purposes, the combination of a post-quantum
   algorithm with a traditional algorithm is the most straightforward
   and recommended.  The use of multiple post-quantum algorithms with
   different mathematical bases has also been considered.  Combining
   algorithms in a way that requires both to be used together ensures
   stronger security, while combinations that do not require both will
   sacrifice security but offer other benefits like backwards
   compatibility and crypto agility.  Including a traditional key
   alongside a post-quantum key often has minimal bandwidth impact.

13.3.2.  Composite Keys in Hybrid Schemes

   When combining keys in an "and" mode, it may make more sense to
   consider them to be a single composite key instead of two keys.  This
   generally requires fewer changes to various components of PKI
   ecosystems, many of which are not prepared to deal with two keys or
   dual signatures.  To those protocol- or application-layer parsers, a
   "composite" algorithm composed of two "component" algorithms is
   simply a new algorithm, and support for adding new algorithms
   generally already exists.  Treating multiple "component" keys as a
   single "composite" key also has security advantages, such as
   preventing cross-protocol reuse of the individual component keys and
   guarantees about revoking or retiring all component keys together at
   the same time, especially if the composite is treated as a single
   object all the way down into the cryptographic module.

   All that needs to be done is to standardize the formats of how the
   two keys from the two algorithms are combined into a single data
   structure and how the two resulting signatures or KEMs are combined
   into a single signature or KEM.  The answer can be as simple as
   concatenation if the lengths are fixed or easily determined.  At the
   time this document is published, security research is ongoing as to
   the security properties of concatenation-based composite signatures
   and KEMs versus more sophisticated signature and KEM combiners and
   protocol contexts in which those simpler combiners are sufficient.

   One last consideration is the specific pairs of algorithms that can
   be combined.  A recent trend in protocols is to only allow a small
   number of "known good" configurations that make sense, often referred
   to in cryptography as a "ciphersuite", instead of allowing arbitrary
   combinations of individual configuration choices that may interact in
   dangerous ways.  The current consensus is that the same approach
   should be followed for combining cryptographic algorithms and that
   "known good" pairs should be explicitly listed ("explicit composite")
   instead of just allowing arbitrary combinations of any two
   cryptographic algorithms ("generic composite").

   The same considerations apply when using multiple certificates to
   transport a pair of related keys for the same subject.  Exactly how
   two certificates should be managed in order to avoid some of the
   pitfalls mentioned above is still an active area of investigation.
   Using two certificates keeps the certificate tooling simple and
   straightforward, but in the end, this simply moves problems (i.e.,
   problems with the requirement that both certificates be used as a
   pair, that two signatures that must be carried separately, and that
   both validate) to the certificate management layer, where addressing
   these concerns in a robust way can be difficult.

   At least one scheme has been proposed that allows the pair of
   certificates to exist as a single certificate when being issued and
   managed but dynamically split into individual certificates when
   needed (see [ENC-PAIR-CERTS]).

13.3.3.  Key Reuse in Hybrid Schemes

   An important security note, particularly when using hybrid signature
   keys, but also to a lesser extent hybrid KEM keys, is key reuse.  In
   traditional cryptography, problems can occur with so-called "cross-
   protocol attacks" when the same key can be used for multiple
   protocols; for example, signing TLS handshakes and signing S/MIME
   emails.  While it is not best practice to reuse keys within the same
   protocol, e.g., using the same key for multiple S/MIME certificates
   for the same user, it is not generally catastrophic for security.
   However, key reuse becomes a large security problem within hybrid
   schemes.

   Consider an {RSA, ML-DSA} hybrid key where the RSA key also appears
   within a single-algorithm certificate.  In this case, an attacker
   could perform a "stripping attack" where they take some piece of data
   signed with the {RSA, ML-DSA} key, remove the ML-DSA signature, and
   present the data as if it was intended for the RSA only certificate.
   This leads to a set of security definitions called "non-separability
   properties", which refers to how well the signature scheme resists
   various complexities of downgrade/stripping attacks
   [HYBRID-SIG-SPECT].  Therefore, it is recommended that implementers
   either reuse the entire hybrid key as a whole or perform fresh key
   generation of all component keys per usage, and must not take an
   existing key and reuse it as a component of a hybrid key.

13.3.4.  Future Directions and Ongoing Research

   Many aspects of hybrid cryptography are still under investigation.
   The LAMPS Working Group at IETF is actively exploring the security
   properties of these combinations, and future standards will reflect
   the evolving consensus on these issues.

14.  Impact on Constrained Devices and Networks

   PQC algorithms generally have larger keys, ciphertext, and signature
   sizes than traditional public key algorithms.  This has particular
   impact on constrained devices that operate with limited data rates.
   In the IoT space, these constraints have historically driven
   significant optimization efforts in the IETF (e.g., in the LAKE and
   CoRE Working Groups) to adapt security protocols to resource-
   constrained environments.

   As the transition to PQC progresses, these environments will face
   similar challenges.  Larger message sizes can increase handshake
   latency, raise energy consumption, and require fragmentation logic.
   Work is ongoing in the IETF to study how PQC can be deployed in
   constrained devices (see [CONSTRAIN-DEV-PCQ]).

15.  Security Considerations

15.1.  Cryptanalysis

   Traditional cryptanalysis exploits weaknesses in algorithm design,
   mathematical vulnerabilities, or implementation flaws that are
   exploitable with classical (i.e., non-quantum) hardware, whereas
   quantum cryptanalysis harnesses the power of CRQCs to solve specific
   mathematical problems more efficiently.  Quantum side-channel attacks
   are another form of quantum cryptanalysis.  In such attacks, a device
   under threat is directly connected to a quantum computer, which then
   injects entangled or superimposed data streams to exploit hardware
   that lacks protection against quantum side channels.  Both pose
   threats to the security of cryptographic algorithms, including those
   used in PQC.  It is crucial to develop and adopt new cryptographic
   algorithms resilient against these threats to ensure long-term
   security in the face of advancing cryptanalysis techniques.

   Recent attacks on the side-channel implementations using deep
   learning-based power analysis have also shown that one needs to be
   cautious while implementing the required PQC algorithms in hardware.
   Two of the most recent works include one attack on ML-KEM [KyberSide]
   and one attack on Saber [SaberSide].  An evolving threat landscape
   points to the fact that lattice-based cryptography is indeed more
   vulnerable to side-channel attacks as in [SideCh] and [LatticeSide].
   Consequently, some mitigation techniques for side-channel attacks
   have been proposed; see [Mitigate1], [Mitigate2], and [Mitigate3].

15.2.  Cryptographic Agility

   Cryptographic agility is recommended for both traditional and quantum
   cryptanalysis as it enables organizations to adapt to emerging
   threats, adopt stronger algorithms, comply with standards, and plan
   for long-term security in the face of evolving cryptanalytic
   techniques and the advent of CRQCs.

   Several PQC schemes are available that need to be tested;
   cryptography experts around the world are pushing for the best
   possible solutions, and the first standards that will ease the
   introduction of PQC are being prepared.  This is of paramount
   importance and is a call for imminent action for organizations,
   bodies, and enterprises to start evaluating their cryptographic
   agility, assess the complexity of implementing PQC into their
   products, processes, and systems, and develop a migration plan that
   achieves their security goals to the best possible extent.

   An important and often overlooked step in achieving cryptographic
   agility is maintaining a cryptographic inventory.  Modern software
   stacks incorporate cryptography in numerous places, making it
   challenging to identify all instances.  Therefore, cryptographic
   agility and inventory management take two major forms.  First,
   application developers responsible for software maintenance should
   actively search for instances of hard-coded cryptographic algorithms
   within applications.  When possible, they should design the choice of
   algorithm to be dynamic, based on application configuration.  Second,
   administrators, policy officers, and compliance teams should take
   note of any instances where an application exposes cryptographic
   configurations.  These instances should be managed through either
   organization-wide written cryptographic policies or automated
   cryptographic policy systems.

   Numerous commercial solutions are available for detecting hard-coded
   cryptographic algorithms in source code and compiled binaries, as
   well as providing cryptographic policy management control planes for
   enterprise and production environments.

15.3.  Jurisdictional Fragmentation

   Another potential application of hybrid schemes bears mentioning,
   even though it is not directly related to PQC: using hybrids to
   navigate inter-jurisdictional cryptographic connections.  Traditional
   cryptography is already fragmented by jurisdiction.  Consider that
   while most jurisdictions support ECDH, those in the United States
   will prefer the NIST curves while those in Germany will prefer the
   Brainpool curves.  China, Russia, and other jurisdictions have their
   own national cryptography standards.  This situation of fragmented
   global cryptography standards is unlikely to improve with PQC.  If
   "and" mode hybrid schemes become standardized for the reasons
   mentioned above, then one could imagine leveraging them to create
   ciphersuites in which a single cryptographic operation simultaneously
   satisfies the cryptographic requirements of both endpoints.

15.4.  Hybrid Key Exchange and Signatures: Bridging the Gap Between PQ/T
       Cryptography

   Post-quantum algorithms selected for standardization are relatively
   new and have not been subject to the same depth of study as
   traditional algorithms.  PQC implementations will also be new and
   therefore more likely to contain implementation bugs than the battle-
   tested crypto implementations that are relied on today.  In addition,
   certain deployments may need to retain traditional algorithms due to
   regulatory constraints, e.g., FIPS [SP-800-56C] or Payment Card
   Industry (PCI) compliance [PCI].  Hybrid key exchange is recommended
   to enhance security against the HNDL attack.  Additionally, hybrid
   signatures provide for time to react in the case of the announcement
   of a devastating attack against any one algorithm, while not fully
   abandoning traditional cryptosystems.

   Hybrid key exchange performs both a classical and a post-quantum key
   exchange in parallel.  It provides security redundancy against
   potential weaknesses in PQC algorithms, allows for a gradual
   transition of trust in PQC algorithms, and, in backward-compatible
   designs, enables gradual adoption without breaking compatibility with
   existing systems.  For instance, in TLS 1.3, a hybrid key exchange
   can combine a widely supported classical algorithm, such as X25519,
   with a post-quantum algorithm like ML-KEM.  This allows legacy
   clients to continue using the classical algorithm while enabling
   upgraded clients to proceed with hybrid key exchange.  In contrast,
   overhead-spreading hybrid designs focus on reducing the PQ overhead.
   For example, approaches like those described in [PQ-MLS] amortize PQ
   costs by selectively applying PQ updates in key exchange processes,
   allowing systems to balance security and efficiency.  This strategy
   ensures a post-quantum secure channel while keeping the overhead
   manageable, making it particularly suitable for constrained
   environments.

   While some hybrid key exchange options introduce additional
   computational and bandwidth overhead, the impact of traditional key
   exchange algorithms (e.g., key size) is typically small, helping to
   keep the overall increase in resource usage manageable for most
   systems.  In highly constrained environments, however, those hybrid
   key exchange protocols may be impractical due to their higher
   resource requirements compared to pure post-quantum or traditional
   key exchange approaches.  However, some hybrid key exchange designs
   distribute the PQC overhead, making them more suitable for
   constrained environments.  The choice of hybrid key exchange design
   depends on the specific system requirements and use case, so the
   appropriate approach may vary.

15.5.  Caution: Ciphertext Commitment in KEM vs. DH

   The ciphertext generated by a KEM is not necessarily directly linked
   to the shared secret it produces.  KEMs allow for multiple
   ciphertexts to encapsulate the same shared secret, which enables
   flexibility in key management without enforcing a strict one-to-one
   correspondence between ciphertexts and shared secrets.  This allows
   for secret reuse across different recipients, sessions, or
   operational contexts without the need for new secrets for each use,
   simplifying key distribution and reducing computational overhead.  In
   contrast, cryptographic schemes like Diffie-Hellman inherently link
   the public key to the derived shared secret, meaning any change in
   the public key results in a different shared secret.

16.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

17.  Further Reading and Resources

   A good book on modern cryptography is "Serious Cryptography, 2nd
   Edition" by Jean-Philippe Aumasson [Serious-Crypt].

   The Open Quantum Safe (OQS) Project [OQS] is an open-source project
   that aims to support the transition to quantum-resistant
   cryptography.

   The IETF's PQUIP Working Group [PQUIP-WG] maintains a list of PQC-
   related protocol work within the IETF.

18.  References

18.1.  Normative References

   [ClassicMcEliece]
              "Classic McEliece", <https://classic.mceliece.org/>.

   [FN-DSA]   "FALCON: Fast Fourier lattice-based compact signatures
              over NTRU", <https://falcon-sign.info/>.

   [FrodoKEM] "FrodoKEM", <https://frodokem.org/>.

   [Grovers]  Grover, L. K., "A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for
              database search", STOC '96: Proceedings of the twenty-
              eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pp.
              212-219, DOI 10.1145/237814.237866, 1 July 1996,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/237814.237866>.

   [ML-DSA]   NIST, "Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Standard",
              NIST FIPS 204, DOI 10.6028/NIST.FIPS.204, August 2024,
              <https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/
              NIST.FIPS.204.pdf>.

   [ML-KEM]   NIST, "Module-Lattice-Based Key-Encapsulation Mechanism
              Standard", NIST FIPS 203, DOI 10.6028/nist.fips.203,
              August 2024, <https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/
              NIST.FIPS.203.pdf>.

   [NTRU]     "NTRU", <https://ntru.org/index.shtml>.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, DOI 10.17487/RFC4034, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4034>.

   [RFC6090]  McGrew, D., Igoe, K., and M. Salter, "Fundamental Elliptic
              Curve Cryptography Algorithms", RFC 6090,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6090, February 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6090>.

   [RFC8235]  Hao, F., Ed., "Schnorr Non-interactive Zero-Knowledge
              Proof", RFC 8235, DOI 10.17487/RFC8235, September 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8235>.

   [RFC8391]  Huelsing, A., Butin, D., Gazdag, S., Rijneveld, J., and A.
              Mohaisen, "XMSS: eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme",
              RFC 8391, DOI 10.17487/RFC8391, May 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8391>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8446>.

   [RFC8554]  McGrew, D., Curcio, M., and S. Fluhrer, "Leighton-Micali
              Hash-Based Signatures", RFC 8554, DOI 10.17487/RFC8554,
              April 2019, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8554>.

   [RFC9180]  Barnes, R., Bhargavan, K., Lipp, B., and C. Wood, "Hybrid
              Public Key Encryption", RFC 9180, DOI 10.17487/RFC9180,
              February 2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9180>.

   [RFC9242]  Smyslov, V., "Intermediate Exchange in the Internet Key
              Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2)", RFC 9242,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9242, May 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9242>.

   [RFC9370]  Tjhai, CJ., Tomlinson, M., Bartlett, G., Fluhrer, S., Van
              Geest, D., Garcia-Morchon, O., and V. Smyslov, "Multiple
              Key Exchanges in the Internet Key Exchange Protocol
              Version 2 (IKEv2)", RFC 9370, DOI 10.17487/RFC9370, May
              2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9370>.

   [RFC9881]  Massimo, J., Kampanakis, P., Turner, S., and B. E.
              Westerbaan, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure --
              Algorithm Identifiers for the Module-Lattice-Based Digital
              Signature Algorithm (ML-DSA)", RFC 9881,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9881, October 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9881>.

   [RSA]      Rivest, R. L., Shamir, A., and L. Adleman, "A Method for
              Obtaining Digital Signatures and Public-Key
              Cryptosystems", Communications of the ACM, vol. 21, no. 2,
              pp. 120-126, DOI 10.1145/359340.359342, February 1978,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/359340.359342>.

   [Shors]    Shor, P., "Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime
              Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum
              Computer", arXiv:quant-ph/9508027v2, 25 January 1996,
              <https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/9508027>.

   [SLH-DSA]  NIST, "Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Standard",
              NIST FIPS 205, DOI 10.6028/NIST.FIPS.205, August 2024,
              <https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/
              NIST.FIPS.205.pdf>.

18.2.  Informative References

   [AddSig]   NIST, "Post-Quantum Cryptography: Additional Digital
              Signature Schemes", <https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/pqc-
              dig-sig/standardization>.

   [ANSSI]    ANSSI, "ANSSI views on the Post-Quantum Cryptography
              transition (2023 follow up)", 21 December 2023,
              <https://cyber.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/document/
              follow_up_position_paper_on_post_quantum_cryptography.pdf>.

   [BBS-SIG-SCHEME]
              Looker, T., Kalos, V., Whitehead, A., and M. Lodder, "The
              BBS Signature Scheme", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-irtf-cfrg-bbs-signatures-10, 8 January 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-
              bbs-signatures-10>.

   [BHK09]    Bellare, M., Hofheinz, D., and E. Kiltz, "Subtleties in
              the Definition of IND-CCA: When and How Should Challenge-
              Decryption be Disallowed?", Cryptology ePrint Archive,
              Paper 2009/418, 2009, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/418>.

   [BIKE]     "BIKE", <https://bikesuite.org/>.

   [BPQS]     Chalkias, K., Brown, J., Hearn, M., Lillehagen, T., Nitto,
              I., and T. Schroeter, "Blockchained Post-Quantum
              Signatures", Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2018/658,
              <https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/658>.

   [BSI-PQC]  BSI, "Quantum-safe cryptography - fundamentals, current
              developments and recommendations", 18 May 2022,
              <https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/
              Publications/Brochure/quantum-safe-
              cryptography.html?nn=916626>.

   [Cloudflare]
              Westerbaan, B., "NIST's pleasant post-quantum surprise",
              Cloudflare Blog, 8 July 2022,
              <https://blog.cloudflare.com/nist-post-quantum-surprise/>.

   [CNSA2-0]  NSA, "Announcing the Commercial National Security
              Algorithm Suite 2.0", September 2022,
              <https://media.defense.gov/2025/May/30/2003728741/-1/-1/0/
              CSA_CNSA_2.0_ALGORITHMS.PDF>.

   [CONSTRAIN-DEV-PCQ]
              Reddy.K, T., Wing, D., Salter, B., and K. Kwiatkowski,
              "Adapting Constrained Devices for Post-Quantum
              Cryptography", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-pquip-pqc-hsm-constrained-05, 1 April 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-pquip-
              pqc-hsm-constrained-05>.

   [CRQCThreat]
              Jaques, S., "Landscape of Quantum Computing",
              <https://sam-jaques.appspot.com/quantum_landscape_2024>.

   [CS01]     Cramer, R. and V. Shoup, "Design and Analysis of Practical
              Public-Key Encryption Schemes Secure against Adaptive
              Chosen Ciphertext Attack", Cryptology ePrint Archive,
              Paper 2001/108, 2001, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2001/108>.

   [ENC-PAIR-CERTS]
              Bonnell, C., Gray, J., Hook, D., Okubo, T., and M.
              Ounsworth, "A Mechanism for Encoding Differences in Paired
              Certificates", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              bonnell-lamps-chameleon-certs-07, 18 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-bonnell-
              lamps-chameleon-certs-07>.

   [GMR88]    Goldwasser, S., Micali, S., and R. L. Rivest, "A digital
              signature scheme secure against adaptive chosen-message
              attacks", SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 17, no. 2, pp.
              281-308, DOI 10.1137/0217017, April 1988,
              <https://people.csail.mit.edu/silvio/
              Selected%20Scientific%20Papers/Digital%20Signatures/
              A_Digital_Signature_Scheme_Secure_Against_Adaptive_Chosen-
              Message_Attack.pdf>.

   [Grover-Search]
              Zalka, C., "Grover's quantum searching algorithm is
              optimal", Physical Review A, vol. 60, no. 4, pp.
              2746-2751, DOI 10.1103/PhysRevA.60.2746, October 1999,
              <https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.60.2746>.

   [HQC]      "HQC", <http://pqc-hqc.org/>.

   [HYBRID-SIG-SPECT]
              Bindel, N., Hale, B., Connolly, D., and F. D, "Hybrid
              signature spectrums", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-pquip-hybrid-signature-spectrums-07, 20 June
              2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-
              pquip-hybrid-signature-spectrums-07>.

   [KEEPINGUP]
              Cremers, C., Dax, A., and N. Medinger, "Keeping Up with
              the KEMs: Stronger Security Notions for KEMs and automated
              analysis of KEM-based protocols", Cryptology ePrint
              Archive, Paper 2023/1933, 2023,
              <https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1933>.

   [KEM-COMBINER]
              Ounsworth, M., Wussler, A., and S. Kousidis, "Combiner
              function for hybrid key encapsulation mechanisms (Hybrid
              KEMs)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ounsworth-
              cfrg-kem-combiners-05, 31 January 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ounsworth-
              cfrg-kem-combiners-05>.

   [KyberSide]
              Ji, Y., Wang, R., Ngo, K., Dubrova, E., and L. Backlund,
              "A Side-Channel Attack on a Hardware Implementation of
              CRYSTALS-Kyber", Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
              2022/1452, 2022, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1452>.

   [LattFail1]
              D'Anvers, J., Guo, Q., Johansson, T., Nilsson, A.,
              Vercauteren, F., and I. Verbauwhede, "Decryption Failure
              Attacks on IND-CCA Secure Lattice-Based Schemes", Public-
              Key Cryptography - PKC 2019, Lecture Notes in Computer
              Science, vol. 11443, pp. 565-598,
              DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-17259-6_19, 6 April 2019,
              <https://link.springer.com/
              chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-17259-6_19>.

   [LattFail2]
              D'Anvers, J., Rossi, M., and F. Virdia, "(One) Failure Is
              Not an Option: Bootstrapping the Search for Failures in
              Lattice-Based Encryption Schemes", Advances in Cryptology
              - EUROCRYPT 2020, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
              12107, pp. 3-33, DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-45727-3_1, 1 May
              2020, <https://link.springer.com/
              chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-45727-3_1>.

   [LatticeSide]
              Ravi, P., Roy, S. S., Chattopadhyay, A., and S. Bhasin,
              "Generic Side-channel attacks on CCA-secure lattice-based
              PKE and KEM schemes", Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
              2019/948, 2019, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/948>.

   [LIBOQS]   "LibOQS - Open Quantum Safe", commit 97f6b86, November
              2025, <https://github.com/open-quantum-safe/liboqs>.

   [Lyu09]    Lyubashevsky, V., "Fiat-Shamir With Aborts: Applications
              to Lattice and Factoring-Based Signatures", ASIACRYPT
              2009, <https://www.iacr.org/archive/
              asiacrypt2009/59120596/59120596.pdf>.

   [Mitigate1]
              Hoffmann, C., Libert, B., Momin, C., Peters, T., and F.
              Standaert, "POLKA: Towards Leakage-Resistant Post-Quantum
              CCA-Secure Public Key Encryption", Cryptology ePrint
              Archive, Paper 2022/873, 2022,
              <https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/873>.

   [Mitigate2]
              Tsai, T., Huang, S., Tseng, Y., Chuang, Y., and Y. Hung,
              "Leakage-Resilient Certificate-Based Authenticated Key
              Exchange Protocol", IEEE Open Journal of the Computer
              Society, vol. 3, pp. 137-148,
              DOI 10.1109/OJCS.2022.3198073, 2022,
              <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9855226>.

   [Mitigate3]
              Azouaoui, M., Kuzovkova, Y., Schneider, T., and C. V.
              Vredendaal, "Post-Quantum Authenticated Encryption against
              Chosen-Ciphertext Side-Channel Attacks", Cryptology ePrint
              Archive, Paper 2022/916, 2022,
              <https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/916>.

   [ML-DSA-X.509]
              Ounsworth, M., Gray, J., Pala, M., Klaußner, J., and S.
              Fluhrer, "Composite Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature
              Algorithm (ML-DSA) for use in X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-lamps-pq-composite-sigs-19, 21 April 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-lamps-
              pq-composite-sigs-19>.

   [NIST]     NIST, "Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization",
              <https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/
              post-quantum-cryptography-standardization>.

   [NISTFINAL]
              NIST, "NIST Releases First 3 Finalized Post-Quantum
              Encryption Standards", 13 August 2024,
              <https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2024/08/nist-
              releases-first-3-finalized-post-quantum-encryption-
              standards>.

   [OQS]      "Open Quantum Safe Project",
              <https://openquantumsafe.org/>.

   [PCI]      PCI Security Standards Council, "Payment Card Industry
              Data Security Standard", PCI DSS: v4.0.1, <https://docs-
              prv.pcisecuritystandards.org/PCI%20DSS/Standard/PCI-DSS-
              v4_0_1.pdf>.

   [PQ-HPKE]  Barnes, R. and D. Connolly, "Post-Quantum and Post-
              Quantum/Traditional Hybrid Algorithms for HPKE", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-hpke-pq-04, 2 March
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-
              hpke-pq-04>.

   [PQ-KEM]   Connolly, D., Barnes, R., and P. Grubbs, "Hybrid PQ/T Key
              Encapsulation Mechanisms", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-irtf-cfrg-hybrid-kems-11, 7 May 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-
              hybrid-kems-11>.

   [PQ-MLS]   Tian, X., Hale, B., Mularczyk, M., and J. Alwen,
              "Amortized PQ MLS Combiner", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-ietf-mls-combiner-02, 22 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-mls-
              combiner-02>.

   [PQCAPI]   NIST, "PQC - API notes",
              <https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/Post-Quantum-
              Cryptography/documents/example-files/api-notes.pdf>.

   [PQRSA]    Bernstein, D. J., Heninger, N., Lou, P., and L. Valenta,
              "Post-quantum RSA", 19 April 2017,
              <https://cr.yp.to/papers/pqrsa-20170419.pdf>.

   [PQUIP-WG] IETF, "Post-Quantum Use In Protocols (pquip)",
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/pquip/documents/>.

   [QC-DNS]   Hoffman, P., "Quantum Computing and the DNS", ICANN Office
              of the Chief Technology Officer, OCTO-031v2, 22 April
              2024, <https://www.icann.org/octo-031-en.pdf>.

   [QuantSide]
              Xu, C., Erata, F., and J. Szefer, "Exploration of Quantum
              Computer Power Side-Channels", arXiv:2304.03315v2, 9 May
              2023, <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03315>.

   [RFC5652]  Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)", STD 70,
              RFC 5652, DOI 10.17487/RFC5652, September 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5652>.

   [RFC9528]  Selander, G., Preuß Mattsson, J., and F. Palombini,
              "Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman Over COSE (EDHOC)", RFC 9528,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9528, March 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9528>.

   [RFC9763]  Becker, A., Guthrie, R., and M. Jenkins, "Related
              Certificates for Use in Multiple Authentications within a
              Protocol", RFC 9763, DOI 10.17487/RFC9763, June 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9763>.

   [RFC9794]  Driscoll, F., Parsons, M., and B. Hale, "Terminology for
              Post-Quantum Traditional Hybrid Schemes", RFC 9794,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9794, June 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9794>.

   [RFC9814]  Housley, R., Fluhrer, S., Kampanakis, P., and B.
              Westerbaan, "Use of the SLH-DSA Signature Algorithm in the
              Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)", RFC 9814,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9814, July 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9814>.

   [RFC9941]  Friedl, M., Mojzis, J., and S. Josefsson, "Secure Shell
              (SSH) Key Exchange Method Using Hybrid Streamlined NTRU
              Prime sntrup761 and X25519 with SHA-512:
              sntrup761x25519-sha512", RFC 9941, DOI 10.17487/RFC9941,
              April 2026, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9941>.

   [RSA10SC]  QuintessenceLabs, "Breaking RSA Encryption - an Update on
              the State-of-the-Art", 13 June 2019,
              <https://www.quintessencelabs.com/blog/breaking-rsa-
              encryption-update-state-art>.

   [RSA8HRS]  Gidney, C. and M. Ekera, "How to factor 2048 bit RSA
              integers in 8 hours using 20 million noisy qubits",
              arXiv:1905.09749v3, 13 April 2021,
              <https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.09749>.

   [RSAShor]  Beauregard, S., "Circuit for Shor's algorithm using 2n+3
              qubits", arXiv:quant-ph/0205095v3, 21 February 2003,
              <https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0205095.pdf>.

   [SaberSide]
              Ngo, K., Dubrova, E., and T. Johansson, "A side-channel
              attack on a masked and shuffled software implementation of
              Saber", Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, vol. 13, pp.
              443-460, DOI 10.1007/s13389-023-00315-3, 25 April 2023,
              <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
              s13389-023-00315-3>.

   [Serious-Crypt]
              Aumasson, J., "Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition", ISBN
              9781718503847, August 2024.

   [SideCh]   Ngo, K., Wang, R., Dubrova, E., and N. Paulsrud, "Side-
              Channel Attacks on Lattice-Based KEMs Are Not Prevented by
              Higher-Order Masking", Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
              2022/919, 2022, <https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/919>.

   [SP-1800-38C]
              Newhouse, W., Souppaya, M., Barke, W., Brown, C.,
              Kampanakis, P., Goodman, J., Prat, J., Larrieu, R., Gray,
              J., Ounsworth, M., Viana, C., Gong, H. L. V., Kwiatkowsk,
              K., Hu, A., Burns, R., Paquin, C., Gilbert, J., Scinta,
              G., Kim, E., and V. Krumme, "Migration to Post-Quantum
              Cryptography Quantum Readiness: Testing Draft Standards,
              Volume C: Quantum-Resistant Cryptography Technology
              Interoperability and Performance Report", Preliminary
              Draft, NIST SP 1800-38C, December 2023,
              <https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/2023-12/
              pqc-migration-nist-sp-1800-38c-preliminary-draft.pdf>.

   [SP-800-56C]
              Barker, E., Chen, L., and R. Davis, "Recommendation for
              Key-Derivation Methods in Key-Establishment Schemes", NIST
              SP 800-56Cr2, DOI 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-56Cr2, August 2020,
              <https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
              NIST.SP.800-56Cr2.pdf>.

   [Threat-Report]
              Mosca, M. and M. Piani, "Quantum Threat Timeline Report
              2020", Global Risk Institute, 27 January 2021,
              <https://globalriskinstitute.org/publications/quantum-
              threat-timeline-report-2020/>.

   [TLS-HYB-KEY-EXCH]
              Stebila, D., Fluhrer, S., and S. Gueron, "Hybrid key
              exchange in TLS 1.3", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design-16, 7 September 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-tls-
              hybrid-design-16>.

   [X-WING]   Connolly, D., Schwabe, P., and B. Westerbaan, "X-Wing:
              general-purpose hybrid post-quantum KEM", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-connolly-cfrg-xwing-kem-
              10, 2 March 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-connolly-cfrg-xwing-kem-10>.

Acknowledgements

   This document leverages text from an earlier Internet-Draft by Paul
   Hoffman.  Thanks to Dan Wing, Florence D, Thom Wiggers, Sophia
   Grundner-Culemann, Panos Kampanakis, Ben S, Sofia Celi, Melchior
   Aelmans, Falko Strenzke, Deirdre Connolly, Hani Ezzadeen, Britta
   Hale, Scott Rose, Hilarie Orman, Thomas Fossati, Roman Danyliw, Mike
   Bishop, Mališa Vučinić, Éric Vyncke, Deb Cooley, Dirk Von Hugo, and
   Daniel Van Geest for the discussion, review and comments.

   In particular, the authors would like to acknowledge the
   contributions to this document by Kris Kwiatkowski.

Authors' Addresses

   Aritra Banerjee
   Nokia
   London
   United Kingdom
   Email: aritra.banerjee@nokia.com


   Tirumaleswar Reddy.K
   Nokia
   Bangalore
   Karnataka
   India
   Email: k.tirumaleswar_reddy@nokia.com


   Dimitrios Schoinianakis
   Nokia
   Athens
   Greece
   Email: dimitrios.schoinianakis@nokia-bell-labs.com


   Timothy Hollebeek
   DigiCert
   Pittsburgh, PA
   United States of America
   Email: tim.hollebeek@digicert.com


   Mike Ounsworth
   Entrust Limited
   2500 Solandt Road, Suite 100
   Ottawa, Ontario  K2K 3G5
   Canada
   Email: mike@ounsworth.ca
