



Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                       J. Peterson
Request for Comments: 9888                                    TransUnion
Category: Standards Track                                      June 2026
ISSN: 2070-1721


   Out-of-Band Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR) for Service
                               Providers

Abstract

   The Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR) framework defines
   means of carrying its Personal Assertion Tokens (PASSporTs) either
   in-band, within the headers of a Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
   request, or out-of-band, through a service that stores PASSporTs for
   retrieval by relying parties.  This specification defines a way that
   the out-of-band conveyance of PASSporTs can be used to support large
   service providers for cases in which in-band STIR conveyance is not
   universally available.

Status of This Memo

   This is an Internet Standards Track document.

   This document is a product of the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).  It represents the consensus of the IETF community.  It has
   received public review and has been approved for publication by the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  Further information on
   Internet Standards is available in Section 2 of RFC 7841.

   Information about the current status of this document, any errata,
   and how to provide feedback on it may be obtained at
   https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9888.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Revised BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
   in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Service Provider Deployment Architecture for Out-of-Band STIR
   4.  Advertising a CPS
   5.  Submitting a PASSporT
   6.  PASSporT Retrieval
   7.  Gateways
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Privacy Considerations
   10. Security Considerations
   11. References
     11.1.  Normative References
     11.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   The Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR) [RFC8224] framework
   provides a cryptographic assurance of the identity of calling parties
   in order to prevent impersonation, which is a key enabler of unwanted
   robocalls, swatting, vishing, voicemail hacking, and similar attacks
   (see [RFC7340]).  The STIR out-of-band [RFC8816] framework enables
   the delivery of PASSporT [RFC8225] objects through a Call Placement
   Service (CPS), rather than carrying them within a signaling protocol
   such as SIP.  Out-of-band conveyance is valuable when end-to-end SIP
   delivery of calls is partly or entirely unavailable due to network
   border policies, calls routinely transiting a gateway to the Public
   Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), or similar circumstances.

   While out-of-band STIR can be implemented as an open Internet
   service, it requires complex security and privacy measures to enable
   the CPS function without allowing the CPS to collect data about the
   parties placing calls.  This specification describes CPS
   implementations that act specifically on behalf of service providers
   who will be processing the calls that STIR secures and, thus, who
   will necessarily know the parties communicating, so an alternative
   security architecture becomes possible.  These functions may be
   crucial to the adoption of STIR in some environments, like legacy
   non-IP telephone networks, where in-band transmission of PASSporTs
   may not be feasible.

   Environments that might support this flavor of STIR out-of-band
   include carriers, large enterprises, call centers, or any Internet
   service that aggregates on behalf of a large number of telephone
   endpoints.  That last case may include PSTN gateway or interexchange
   or international transit providers.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Service Provider Deployment Architecture for Out-of-Band STIR

   The architecture in this specification assumes that every
   participating service provider is associated with one or more
   designated CPS instances.  A service provider's CPS serves as a place
   where callers or, in some cases, gateways can deposit a PASSporT when
   attempting to place a call to a subscriber of the destination service
   provider; if the caller's domain supports in-band STIR, this can be
   done at the same time as an in-band STIR call is placed.  The
   terminating service provider could operate the CPS themselves, or a
   third party could operate the CPS on the destination's behalf.  This
   model does not assume a monolithic CPS that acts on behalf of all
   service providers, nor does it prohibit multiple service providers
   from sharing a CPS provider.  Moreover, a particular CPS can be a
   logically distributed entity compromised of several geographically
   distant entities that flood PASSporTs among themselves to support an
   anycast-like service.

   The process of locating a destination CPS and submitting a PASSporT
   naturally requires Internet connectivity to the CPS.  If the CPS is
   deployed in the terminating service provider network, any such
   network connectivity could instead be leveraged by a caller to
   initiate a SIP session, during which in-band STIR could be used
   normally.  Therefore, the applicability of this architecture is to
   those cases where, for whatever reason, SIP requests cannot reliably
   convey PASSporTs end-to-end, but an HTTP transaction can reliably be
   sent to the CPS from an out-of-band authentication service (OOB-AS).
   It is hoped that as IP connectivity between telephone providers
   increases, there will be less need for an out-of-band mechanism, but
   it can serve as a fallback mechanism in cases where service providers
   cannot predict whether end-to-end delivery of SIP calls will occur.

4.  Advertising a CPS

   If more than one CPS exists for a given deployment, there will need
   to be some means of discovering CPSs, either administratively or
   programmatically.  Many service providers have bilateral agreements
   to peer with one another; in those environments, identifying their
   respective CPSs could be a simple matter of provisioning.  A
   consortium of service providers could agree to choose from a list of
   available CPS providers, say.  But in more pluralist environments,
   some mechanism is needed to discover the CPS associated with the
   target of a call.

   In order to allow the CPS chosen by a service provider to be
   discovered securely, this specification defines a CPS advertisement.
   Effectively, a CPS advertisement is a document that contains the URL
   of a CPS as well as any information needed to determine which
   PASSporTs should be submitted to that CPS (e.g., Service Provider
   Codes (SPCs) or telephone number ranges).  An advertisement may be
   signed with a STIR [RFC8226] credential or another credential that is
   trusted by the participants in a given STIR environment.  The
   advantage to signing with STIR certificates is that they contain a
   "TNAuthList" value indicating the telephone network resources that a
   service provider controls.  This information can be matched with a
   TNAuthList value in the CPS advertisement to determine whether the
   signer has the authority to advertise a particular CPS as the proper
   destination for PASSporTs.

   The format of a service provider CPS advertisement consists of a
   simple JSON object containing one or more pairs of TNAuthList values
   pointing to the URIs of CPSs, for example:

   { "0-1234":"https://cps.example.com" }

   The format of this is a hyphen-separated concatenation of each
   [RFC8226] TNAuthList TNEntry value ("0" for SPC, "1" for telephone
   number range, "2" for individual telephone number) with the
   corresponding TNAuthList value.  Note for case "1", telephone number
   ranges are expressed by a starting telephone number followed by a
   count, and the count itself; they are hyphen-separated from the TN
   (e.g., "1-15714341000-99").  An advertisement can contain multiple
   such ranges by adding more pairs.  CPS URIs MUST be HTTPS URIs
   (Section 4.2.2 of [RFC9110]).  These CPS URIs SHOULD be publicly
   reachable as service providers cannot usually anticipate all of the
   potential callers that might want to connect with them; however, in
   more constrained environments, they MAY be only reachable over a
   closed network.

   Advertising an SPC may be inappropriate in environments where an
   originating domain has no ready means to determine whether a given
   called telephone number falls within the scope of an SPC (such as a
   national routing database that maps telephone numbers to SPCs).  In
   such environments, TN-based advertisements could enable discovery
   instead.  Also, note that PASSporTs can be used to sign communication
   where the "orig" and/or "dest" are not telephone numbers as such, but
   instead URI-based identifiers; typically, these PASSporTs would not
   be validated with a certificate as described in [RFC8226] and any
   future specification would be required to identify URI-based prefixes
   for CPS advertisements.

   CPS advertisements could be made available through existing or new
   databases, potentially aggregated across multiple service providers
   and distributed to call originators as necessary.  They could be
   discovered during the call routing process, including through a DNS
   lookup.  They could be shared through a distributed database among
   the participants in a multilateral peering arrangement.

   An alternative to CPS advertisements that may be usable in some
   environments is adding a field to STIR certificates as described in
   [RFC8226] identifying the CPS URI issued to individual service
   providers.  As these certificates are themselves signed by a
   Certification Authority (CA) and contain their own TNAuthList, the
   URI would be bound securely to the proper telephone network
   identifiers.  As STIR assumes a community of relying parties who
   trust these credentials, this method perhaps best mirrors the trust
   model required to allow a CPS to authorize PASSporT submission and
   retrieval.

5.  Submitting a PASSporT

   Submitting a PASSporT to a CPS as specified in the STIR out-of-band
   framework [RFC8816] requires security measures that are intended to
   prevent the CPS from learning the identity of the caller (or callee)
   to the degree possible.  However, in this service provider case, the
   CPS is operated by the service provider of the callee (or an entity
   operating on their behalf) and, as such, the information that appears
   in the PASSporT is redundant with call signaling that the terminating
   party will receive anyway (see Section 10 for potential data
   minimization concerns).  Therefore, the service provider out-of-band
   framework does not attempt to conceal the identity of the originating
   or terminating party from the CPS.

   An OOB-AS forms a secure connection with the target CPS.  This may
   happen at the time a call is being placed or it may be a persistent
   connection if there is a significant volume of traffic sent over this
   interface.  The OOB-AS SHOULD authenticate itself to the CPS via
   mutual TLS (see [RFC9325]) using its STIR credential [RFC8226], the
   same one it would use to sign calls; this helps mitigate the risk of
   flooding that more-open OOB implementations may face.  Furthermore,
   the use of mutual TLS prevents attackers from replaying captured
   PASSporTs to the CPS.  A CPS makes its own policy decision as to
   whether it will accept calls from a particular OOB-AS, and at what
   volumes.

   A CPS can use this mechanism to authorize service providers who
   already hold STIR credentials to submit PASSporTs to a CPS, but
   alternative mechanisms would be required for any entities that do not
   hold a STIR credential, including gateway or transit providers who
   want to submit PASSporTs.  See Section 7 for more on their behavior.

   Service provider out-of-band PASSporTs do not need to be encrypted
   for storage at the CPS, although the use of TLS to prevent
   eavesdropping on the connection between the CPS and OOB-ASs is
   REQUIRED.  PASSporTs will typically be submitted to the CPS at the
   time they are created by an AS; if the PASSporT is also being used
   for in-band transit within a SIP request, the PASSporT can be
   submitted to the CPS before or after the SIP request is sent, at the
   discretion of the originating domain.  An OOB-AS MUST implement a
   Representational State Transfer (REST) interface to submit PASSporTs
   to the CPS as described in Section 9 of [RFC8816].  PASSporTs persist
   at the CPS for as long as is required for them to be retrieved (see
   Section 6) but, in any event, for no longer than the freshness
   interval of the PASSporT itself (a maximum of sixty seconds).

6.  PASSporT Retrieval

   The STIR out-of-band framework [RFC8816] proposes two means by which
   called parties can acquire PASSporTs out-of-band: through a retrieval
   interface or a subscription interface.  In the service provider
   context, where many calls to or from the same number may pass through
   a CPS simultaneously, an out-of-band-capable verification service
   (OOB-VS) may therefore operate in one of two modes: it can either
   pull PASSporTs from the CPS after calls arrive or receive push
   notifications from the CPS for incoming calls.

   CPS implementations MUST support pulling of the PASSporTs via the
   REST flow described in Section 9 of [RFC8816].  In the pull model, a
   terminating service provider polls the CPS via its OOB-VS after
   having received a call for which the call signaling does not itself
   carry a PASSporT.  Exactly how a CPS determines which PASSporTs an
   OOB-VS is eligible to receive over this interface is a matter of
   local policy.  If a CPS serves only one service provider, then all
   PASSporTs submitted to the CPS are made available to the OOB-VS of
   that provider; indeed, the CPS and OOB-VS may be colocated or
   effectively operated as a consolidated system.  In a multi-provider
   environment, the STIR credential of the terminating domain can be
   used by the CPS to determine the range of TNAuthLists for which an
   OOB-VS is entitled to receive PASSporTs; this may be through a
   mechanism like mutual TLS or through the use of the STIR credential
   to sign a token that is submitted to the CPS by the retrieving
   OOB-VS.  Note that a multi-provider CPS will need to inspect the
   "dest" element of a PASSporT to determine which OOB-VS should receive
   the PASSporT.

   In a push model, an OOB-VS could, for example, subscribe to a range
   of telephone numbers or a list of SPCs, which will be directed to
   that OOB-VS by the CPS (provided the OOB-VS is authorized to receive
   them by the CPS).  PASSporT might be sent to the OOB-VS either before
   or after unsigned call signaling has been received by the terminating
   domain.  In either model, the terminating side may need to delay
   rendering a call verification indicator when alerting, in order to
   await the potential arrival of a PASSporT at the OOB-VS.  The exact
   timing of this, and its interaction with the substitution attack
   described in Section 7.4 of [RFC8816], is left for future work.

7.  Gateways

   In some deployment architectures, gateways might perform a function
   that interfaces with a CPS for the retrieval or storage of PASSporTs,
   especially in cases when in-band STIR service providers need to
   exchange secure calls with providers that can only be reached by STIR
   out-of-band.  For example, a closed network of in-band STIR providers
   may send SIP INVITEs to a gateway in front of a traditional PSTN
   tandem that services a set of legacy service providers.  In that
   environment, a gateway might extract a PASSporT from an in-band SIP
   INVITE and store it in a CPS that was established to handle requests
   for one or more legacy providers, who, in turn, consume those
   PASSporTs through an OOB-VS to assist in robocall mitigation and
   similar functions.

   The simplest way to implement a gateway performing this sort of
   function for a service provider CPS system is to issue credentials to
   the gateway that allow it to act on behalf of the legacy service
   providers it supports: this would allow it to both add PASSporTs to
   the CPS acting on behalf of the legacy providers and also to create
   PASSporTs for in-band STIR conveyance from the legacy-providers to
   terminating service providers in the closed STIR network.  For
   example, a service provider could issue a delegate certificate
   [RFC9060] for this purpose.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Privacy Considerations

   The analysis of out-of-band STIR in the Privacy Considerations
   section of [RFC8816] differs considerably from this document.  Per
   Section 1, this specification was motivated in part by choosing a
   different privacy architecture than [RFC8816], one in which the CPS
   is operated by a service provider who is a party to the call itself
   and, thus, would independently have access to the call metadata
   captured in a PASSporT.

   That said, in cases where a third-party service operates the
   verification service function on behalf of a carrier, that third-
   party service would indeed be privy to this metadata.  It is a fairly
   common situation for third-party services to receive this sort of
   metadata to perform tasks related to billing, security, number
   translation, and so on; existing data governance agreements could be
   readily applied to the out-of-band STIR use case.

   Finally, note that PASSporTs are extensible tokens, and it is
   conceivable that they might contain data that is not otherwise
   carried in SIP signaling or that would ordinarily be considered a
   component of call metadata.  Any such extensions might have specific
   interactions with the privacy of both in-band and out-of-band STIR
   that their specifications would need to elaborate.

10.  Security Considerations

   The Security Considerations section of [RFC8816] applies to this
   document, including concerns about potential denial-of-service
   vectors and traffic analysis.  However, that specification's model
   focused a great deal on the privacy implications of uploading
   PASSporTs to a third-party web service.  This document mitigates
   those concerns by making the CPS one of the parties to call setup (or
   an entity contractually acting on their behalf).  That said, any
   architecture in which PASSporTs are shared with a federated or
   centralized CPS raises potential concerns about data collection
   [RFC7258].  Moreover, in a PASSporT, any additional information that
   is not strictly redundant with the contents of a SIP request
   increases data collection concerns; PASSporTs as defined in [RFC8225]
   only contain information redundant with the SIP request.  Existing
   and future extensions (e.g., the "origid" field described in
   [RFC8588]) might leak further information.

   Unlike [RFC8816], this document proposes the use of STIR certificates
   to authenticate transactions with a CPS as well as signatures for CPS
   advertisements.  This presumes an environment where STIR certificates
   are issued by trust anchors that are already trusted by the CPS,
   potentially to gateways and similar services.  Common STIR
   deployments use SPCs instead of telephone number ranges to identify
   service providers today; determining whether a given SPC entitles a
   service provider to access PASSporTs for a given telephone number is
   not trivial, but is a necessary component of this CPS architecture.
   Otherwise, if anyone with a STIR certificate were able to publish or
   access PASSporTs for any telephone number, this could lead to an
   undesirable environment where effectively anyone with a STIR
   certificate could acquire PASSporTs for calls in progress to any
   service provider.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8224]  Peterson, J., Jennings, C., Rescorla, E., and C. Wendt,
              "Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 8224,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8224, February 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8224>.

   [RFC8225]  Wendt, C. and J. Peterson, "PASSporT: Personal Assertion
              Token", RFC 8225, DOI 10.17487/RFC8225, February 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8225>.

   [RFC8226]  Peterson, J. and S. Turner, "Secure Telephone Identity
              Credentials: Certificates", RFC 8226,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8226, February 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8226>.

   [RFC8816]  Rescorla, E. and J. Peterson, "Secure Telephone Identity
              Revisited (STIR) Out-of-Band Architecture and Use Cases",
              RFC 8816, DOI 10.17487/RFC8816, February 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8816>.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9110>.

   [RFC9325]  Sheffer, Y., Saint-Andre, P., and T. Fossati,
              "Recommendations for Secure Use of Transport Layer
              Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security
              (DTLS)", BCP 195, RFC 9325, DOI 10.17487/RFC9325, November
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9325>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC7258]  Farrell, S. and H. Tschofenig, "Pervasive Monitoring Is an
              Attack", BCP 188, RFC 7258, DOI 10.17487/RFC7258, May
              2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7258>.

   [RFC7340]  Peterson, J., Schulzrinne, H., and H. Tschofenig, "Secure
              Telephone Identity Problem Statement and Requirements",
              RFC 7340, DOI 10.17487/RFC7340, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7340>.

   [RFC8588]  Wendt, C. and M. Barnes, "Personal Assertion Token
              (PaSSporT) Extension for Signature-based Handling of
              Asserted information using toKENs (SHAKEN)", RFC 8588,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8588, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8588>.

   [RFC9060]  Peterson, J., "Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR)
              Certificate Delegation", RFC 9060, DOI 10.17487/RFC9060,
              September 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9060>.

Acknowledgments

   Thank you to Alex Fenichel for contributing to this specification.

Author's Address

   Jon Peterson
   TransUnion
   Email: jon.peterson@transunion.com
